MATERIALS AND WORKMANSHIP.
Any building work which is subject to the requirements imposed by Schedule 1 to the Building Regulations shall be carried out in accordance with regulation 7.
If insulating material is inserted into a cavity in a cavity wall,  reasonable  precautions  shall  be  taken  to  prevent  the subsequent permeation of any toxic fumes from that material into any part of the building occupied by people.
To reduce the risks to the health of persons in buildings formaldehyde fumes given off by urea formaldehyde foams should not penetrate to occupied parts of buildings to an extent which would give rise to an irritant concentration.
This Approved Document deals with the following Requirement from Part D of Schedule 1 to the Building Regulations 2010.
Requirement.
Cavity insulation.
D1.
If insulating material is inserted into a cavity in a cavity wall,  reasonable  precautions  shall  be  taken  to  prevent  the subsequent permeation of any toxic fumes from that material into any part of the building occupied by people.
Limits on application.
Acceptable level of performance.
To reduce the risks to the health of persons in buildings formaldehyde fumes given off by urea formaldehyde foams should not penetrate to the occupied parts of buildings to an extent which would give rise to an irritant concentration.
Urea formaldehyde (UF) foam.
Insulating materials which give off formaldehyde fumes (either when used or later in normal use) may be used to insulate the cavity in a cavity wall where there is a continuous barrier which will minimise as far as practicable the passage of fumes to the occupiable parts.
Technical solution.
A cavity wall may be insulated with UF foam where:a.  the inner leaf of the wall is built of masonry (bricks or blocks); and b.  the suitability of the wall for foam filling is assessed before the work is carried out in accordance with BS 8208-1:1985 Guide to assessment of suitability of external cavity walls for filling with thermal insulants.
Existing traditional cavity construction; andc.  the person carrying out the work holds (or operates under) a current Certificate of Registration of Assessed Capability for the work he is doing; and d.  the material is in accordance with the relevant recommendations of BS 5617:1985 Specifications for urea formaldehyde (UF) foam systems suitable for thermal insulation of cavity walls with masonry or concrete inner and outer leaves; and e.  the installation is in accordance with BS 5618:1985 Code of practice for thermal insulation of cavity walls (with masonry or concrete inner and outer leaves) by filling with urea formaldehyde (UF) foam systems.
