Table 0.1  Residential buildings within the scope of this approved document Shared communal rooms and common spaces. 

0.4  Shared communal rooms and common spaces of buildings containing more than one residential 

unit fall within the scope of this approved document.


A unit that contains both living accommodation and space for commercial purposes (e.g. as a
workshop or office) should be treated as a residential building, as long as the commercial part can
revert to residential use.


What constitutes a substantial proportion should be assessed on a casebycase basis by the 

building control body.


Alternative approaches are possible but they should be discussed and 

agreed with a building control body before building work starts.


0.9  The legal requirements of the Building Regulations must be met, regardless of whether the 

guidance in this approved document is followed or alternative measures are taken.


0.10  If alternative ways of mitigating overheating are adopted, the overall level of overheating risk 

reduction should not be lower than the approved document provides.


Interaction with Part F.

0.13  This approved document, Approved Document O, includes guidance on providing means of 

removing excess heat from residential buildings.


Where openings are used, the amount of 

ventilation for removing excess heat is likely to be higher than the purge ventilation required for 

Part F. The higher amount of ventilation applies  see Section 1 or Section 2 of this approved 

document, depending on the method of compliance.


0.15  The guidance in Approved Document J should be followed when installing and testing ventilation 

appliances and combustion appliances must operate safely whether or not fans are running.


Control of heat losses from pipework is dealt with under Part L of the Building 

Regulations and the guidance in Approved Document L should be followed.


Interaction with Part K and Part M.

0.18  Where manual controls are provided, they should be within reasonable reach of the occupants, to 

comply with Approved Documents K and M. 

Interaction with Part K.

0.19  This approved document, Approved Document O, gives guidance on increased levels of protection 

from falling from openings compared to Part K. 

Interaction with Part Q.

0.20 This approved document, Approved Document O, gives guidance on security considerations when 

providing large openings for removing excess heat.


Limits on application.

Requirement.

O1 Overheating mitigation.

 Reasonable provision must be made in respect 

of a dwelling, institution or any other building 

containing one or more rooms for residential 

purposes, other than a room in a hotel 

(residences) to

(a)  limit unwanted solar gains in summer;

(b)   provide an adequate means to remove heat 

from the indoor environment.


In meeting the obligations in paragraph (1)

(a)   account must be taken of the safety of any 

occupant, and their reasonable enjoyment of 

the residence; and

(b)   mechanical cooling may only be used where 

insufficient heat is capable of being removed 

from the indoor environment without it.


Providing an adequate means of removing excess heat from the indoor environment.


The simplified method for limiting solar gains and providing a means of removing excess heat, as 

set out in Section 1. 


Categorising residential buildings (simplified method).

1.2  For the simplified method, the strategy to reduce overheating risk should be selected according 

to the location of the new residential building and whether it has crossventilation, following 

paragraphs 1.3 to 1.5.


1.4  For the purposes of following the simplified method, it should be identified whether the 

dwellinghouse or each residential unit, shared communal room and common space is able to have 

crossventilation, i.e.


Each residential unit, shared communal room and common space should be 

categorised separately.


To provide an appropriate means of removing excess heat from the indoor environment  follow 

paragraphs 1.10 to 1.13.


Limiting solar gains.

1.6  To limit solar gains, all of the following standards should be followed.


This should be determined using the orientation of the faade that has the largest area of 

glazing.


This should be 

determined using the orientation of the faade that has the largest area of glazing.


1.7  Buildings or parts of buildings with crossventilation should not exceed the maximum glazing areas 

in Table 1.1.


1.8  Buildings or parts of buildings with no crossventilation should not exceed the maximum glazing 

areas in Table 1.2.


Shading should be provided by one of the following means.


External shutters with means of ventilation.


Removing excess heat.

1.10  Buildings or parts of buildings with crossventilation should equal or exceed the minimum free 

areas in Table 1.3.


1.11  Buildings or parts of buildings with no crossventilation should equal or exceed the minimum free 

areas in Table 1.4.


1.12  Openings should be designed to achieve the free areas in paragraphs 1.10 and 1.11.


The equivalent 

area of the opening should meet or exceed the free area of the opening.


The equivalent area of the 

opening should be assessed by either of the following means.


Calculation using Appendix D.

NOTE: A system for purge ventilation should be provided in each habitable room to demonstrate 

compliance with Part F of the Building Regulations.


When following 

this simplified method, applying the guidance in paragraphs 1.10 to 1.12 will usually result in free 

areas that exceed the free areas in Approved Document F, Volume 1: Dwellings.


1.13  The simplified method is not suitable for buildings with more than one residential unit which use a 

communal heating or hot water system with significant amounts of horizontal heating or hot water 

distribution pipework.


Main distribution routes should be through vertical risers to minimise heat 

gains into common spaces.


Dynamic thermal modelling method. 

2.3  To demonstrate compliance using the dynamic thermal modelling method, all of the following 

guidance should be followed.


2.4  The building control body should be provided with a report that demonstrates that the residential 

building passes CIBSEs TM59 assessment of overheating.


These 

limits should be applied when following the guidance in CIBSEs TM59.


When a room is occupied during the day (8am to 11pm), openings should be modelled to do all 

of the following.


Start to open when the internal temperature exceeds 22C.


Be fully open when the internal temperature exceeds 26C.


At night (11pm to 8am), openings should be modelled as fully open if both of the following apply.


The internal temperature exceeds 23C at 11pm.


In the day, windows, patio doors and balcony doors should be modelled as open, if this can 

be done securely, following the guidance in paragraph 3.7 below.


At night, windows, patio doors and balcony doors should be modelled as closed.


d.  An entrance door should be included, which should be shut all the time.


Acceptable strategies for reducing overheating risk.

Limiting solar gains. 

2.7  Solar gains in summer should be limited by any of the following means.


Removing excess heat.

2.10  Excess heat should be removed from the residential building by any of the following means.


d.  A mechanical cooling system.

2.11  The building should be constructed to meet requirement O1 using passive means as far as 

reasonably practicable.


It should be demonstrated to the building control body that all practicable 

passive means of limiting unwanted solar gains and removing excess heat have been used first 

before adopting mechanical cooling.


NOTE: Any method to reduce overheating risk in residential buildings must comply with all other 

parts of the Building Regulations.


Particular attention should be paid to the requirements of Part F 

and the guidance in Approved Document F, Volume 1: Dwellings on noise and maintenance.


NOTE: A system for purge ventilation should be provided in each habitable room to demonstrate 

compliance with Part F of the Building Regulations.


The guidance in Section 1 of Approved 

Document F, Volume 1: Dwellings should be followed for the minimum standards for purge 

ventilation.


A larger amount of purge ventilation may be required than that in Approved Document 

F, Volume 1: Dwellings in order to satisfy requirement O1 on providing an adequate means to 

remove excess heat from the indoor environment.


Limits on application.

Requirement.

O1 Overheating mitigation.

 Reasonable provision must be made in respect 

of a dwelling, institution or any other building 

containing one or more rooms for residential 

purposes, other than a room in a hotel 

(residences) to

(a)  limit unwanted solar gains in summer;

(b)   provide an adequate means to remove heat 

from the indoor environment.


(2) In meeting the obligations in paragraph (1)

(a) account must be taken of the safety of any 

occupant, and their reasonable enjoyment of 

the residence; and

(b) mechanical cooling may only be used where 

insufficient heat is capable of being removed 

from the indoor environment without it.


In such 

cases, dynamic thermal modelling should be used.


3.3  Windows are likely to be closed during sleeping hours if noise within bedrooms exceeds the 

following limits.


55dB LAFmax, more than 10 times a night (between 11pm and 7am).


3.4  Where insitu noise measurements are used as evidence that these limits are not exceeded, 

measurements should be taken in accordance with the Association of Noise Consultants 

Measurement of Sound Levels in Buildings with the overheating mitigation strategy in use.


Pollution.

3.5  Buildings located near to significant local pollution sources should be designed to minimise  

the intake of external air pollutants.


Security.

3.6  When determining the free area available for ventilation during sleeping hours, only the proportion 

of openings that can be opened securely should be considered to provide useful ventilation.


Only the proportion of openings which can be opened with a very 

low risk of occupants falling from height should be considered to form part of the overheating 

mitigation strategy.


Window handles on windows that open outwards are not more than 650mm from the inside 

face of the wall when the window is at its maximum openable angle.


Guarding should be sized to prevent the passage of a 100mm sphere.


3.10  Guarding for large openings could include, but is not limited to, either of the following.


c.  Any looped cords must be fitted with child safety devices.


(2)   The person carrying out the work must, not later than five days after the work has been completed, give 

sufficient information to the owner about the provision made in accordance with Part O so that the 

systems in place further to Part O can be operated in such a manner as to protect against overheating.


Intention.

When a new residential building is erected, information about the building must be given to the 

owner of the building to allow them to use the overheating mitigation strategy effectively. 

Section 4: Providing information.

4.1  Sufficient information about the overheating mitigation strategy and its maintenance requirements 

must be given to owners so that it can be used effectively.


The information should be provided in a 

clear manner, for a nontechnical audience.


4.2 The following information should be provided, where relevant.


d. The time of day that different parts of the strategy should be used.


For example, the shutters 

should be used in the day and the windows opened only when it is cooler outside.


e.  The time of year when the strategy should be used.


Home User Guide.

4.3 A Home User Guide should be provided for new dwellings as described in Section 9 of Approved 

Document L, Volume 1: Dwellings.


The information in paragraph 4.2 should be provided in this section of the Home User 

Guide.


Where the system provides more than one function, 

the owner should be informed of each separate function.


A window within 2m vertically of a flat or 

sloping roof (with a pitch of less than 30 

degrees) that is within 3.5m of ground level.


Where a room serves more than one activity, 

e.g. open-plan kitchen and living room, the area 

with the largest glazing area should be assessed 

and the room area calculated based on a room 

depth no greater than 4.5m from the glazed façade.


Passive means Any means of cooling a building 

which is not mechanical cooling (e.g. air
conditioning).


Openable windows or mechanical 

ventilation fans are considered to be passive means 

of cooling.


B2 All three parts of the compliance checklist should be completed.


The relevant parts of Part 2 and 3 

should be signed by a person who is competent to design the residential building.


C2 This appendix should be used with the simplified method to categorise residential buildings, 

following paragraph 1.3.


To use the tables for bottom and top hung 

windows, the h and w should be reversed.


Each of the two sections of the centrally hinged window should be 

assessed as a single side, bottom or top hung window.


The opening should be assessed using Table D9, assuming an opening angle of  

90 degrees.