Where a car park is constructed or work is carried out to 

an existing car park, care must be taken to ensure that the fire safety requirements of the Building 

Regulations have been met.


Manual controls, where provided, should be within 

reasonable reach of the occupants.


Access requirements must be considered when locating electric 

vehicle charge points.


Accessible parking spaces must meet the Part M requirements.


Where electrical work is carried out for a dwelling, Part P 

of the Building Regulations must be met.


Requirement.

The erection of new residential buildings

(1)   A new residential building with associated parking must have access to electric vehicle charge points as 

provided for in paragraph (2).


(2)  The number of associated parking spaces which have access to electric vehicle charge points must be

(a)   the total number of associated parking spaces, where there are fewer associated parking spaces than 

there are dwellings contained in the residential building; or

(b)   the number of associated parking spaces that is equal to the total number of dwellings contained in 

the residential building, where there are the same number of associated parking spaces as, or more 

associated parking spaces than, there are dwellings.


(3)   Cable routes for electric vehicle charge points must be installed in any associated parking spaces which do 

not, in accordance with paragraph (2), have an electric vehicle charge point where

(a)  a new residential building has more than 10 associated parking spaces; and

(b)  there are more associated parking spaces than there are dwellings contained in the residential building.


(2)   The number of electric vehicle charge points that must be installed is the maximum number of electric 

vehicle charge points that it is possible to install at an average sum of 3600 or less for the connection 

cost of each electric vehicle charge point connection (the 3600 cap).


(3)   If it is not possible to completely fulfil the requirements of paragraph S1(2) of Schedule 1 as a result of 

the operation of the 3600 cap, cable routes for electric vehicle charge points must be installed in the 

associated parking spaces that would otherwise be required to have electric vehicle charge points, but for 

the operation of the 3600 cap.


(4)   Where the new residential building has, or will have, associated parking that is situated within a covered 

car park

(a)   if there are or will be any associated parking spaces situated in a position other than in a covered car park

(i)   the requirements of paragraph S1 of Schedule 1 must first be applied in relation to those parking 

spaces; then

(ii)   if the number of associated parking spaces, which are situated in a position other than in a covered 

car park, is insufficient to completely fulfil the requirements of paragraph S1(2) of Schedule 1, cable 

routes for electric vehicle charge points must be installed in

(aa) 

 the number of parking spaces in the covered car park which, when added to the number 

of associated parking spaces which are situated in a position other than in the covered car 

park, corresponds to the total number of dwellings with associated parking, where the total 

number of associated parking spaces is 10 or less;

(bb)   all the associated parking spaces in the covered car park, where the total number of 

associated parking spaces is both less than the number of dwellings with associated parking 

and 10 or less; and

(cc) all the associated parking spaces in the covered car park, where the total number of 

associated parking spaces is more than 10;

(b) if all the associated parking spaces are situated in a covered car park, cable routes for electric vehicle 

charge points must be installed

(i)   where there are 10 or fewer parking spaces

(aa) in the number of associated parking spaces in the covered car park which corresponds to the 

total number of dwellings with associated parking;

(bb)   in all the parking spaces where there are fewer parking spaces than there are dwellings;

(ii)  in all the parking spaces in the covered car park, where there are more than 10 parking spaces.


The building has more than 10 associated parking spaces.


Section 1: New residential buildings.

New dwellings.

1.1  Where associated parking spaces are provided for a new residential building, the number of 

associated parking spaces that have access to an electric vehicle charge point must be a minimum 

of either of the following.


If either:

a.  the average connection cost for an electric vehicle charge point connection is greater  

than 3600;

b.  some of the associated parking spaces associated with the new residential building are within  

a covered car park

the total number of associated parking spaces which have access to either an electric vehicle 

charge point or cable routes must be a minimum of either of the following.


If the number of associated parking spaces for the new residential building is both

a. more than 10;

b. more than the number of dwellings

cable routes must be provided for all associated parking spaces which do not have access to an 

electric vehicle charge point.


The average connection cost for each electric vehicle charge point connection is less than 

3600, determined according to paragraph 1.5.


1.6  Where the connection cost is greater than 3600 per electric vehicle charge point connection, 

the maximum number of electric vehicle charge points should be installed before the extra grid 

connection costs exceed 3600 per electric vehicle charge point connection.


1.7  To show that the connection cost is greater than 3600 at least two formal quotes should be given 

to the building control body during the notice/plans stage as follows.


At least one quote should be from a distribution network operator.


The maximum number of electric vehicle charge points that can be installed before the 

extra grid connections costs exceed 3600 per charge point per dwelling.


Requirement.

Dwellings resulting from a material change of use.

 Where one or more dwellings with associated parking result from a building, or a part of a building, 

undergoing a material change of use at least one associated parking space for the use of each such dwelling 

must have access to an electric vehicle charge point.


(3)   If paragraph (2)(a) and (c) applies, but electric vehicle charge points for some but not all of the 

dwellings resulting from a building, or a part of a building, undergoing a material change of use can be 

accommodated within the incoming electrical supply to that building

(a)   the requirements of paragraph S2 of Schedule 1 apply in respect of the maximum number of electric 

vehicle charge points that can be accommodated within the incoming electrical supply; and

(b)   cable routes for electric vehicle charge points must be installed in the associated parking spaces that 

would otherwise have been required under paragraph S2 of Schedule 1 to have had electric vehicle 

charge points installed.


(5)   If the building, or a part of a building, undergoing a material change of use to result in one or more 

dwellings has, or will have, associated parking that is situated within a covered car park

(a)   if there are or will be any associated parking spaces situated in a position other than in a covered car 

park

 the requirements of paragraph S2 of Schedule 1 must first be applied in relation to those 

associated parking spaces; then

(ii)   if the number of associated parking spaces, which are situated in a position other than in a covered 

car park, is insufficient to completely fulfil the requirements of paragraph S2 of Schedule 1, cable 

routes for electric vehicle charge points must be installed in

(aa) 

 all the associated parking spaces in the covered car park, where the total number of parking 

spaces is less than the number of such dwellings with associated parking; or

(bb)   the number of associated parking spaces in the covered car park which, when added to the 

number of associated parking spaces which are situated in a position other than in a covered 

car park, corresponds to the total number of such dwellings with associated parking;

(b)   if all the associated parking spaces are situated in a covered car park, cable routes for electric vehicle 

charge points must be installed in

 all those associated parking spaces, where there are fewer parking spaces than there are such 

dwellings with associated parking; or

(ii)   the number of those associated parking spaces that corresponds to the total number of such 

dwellings with associated parking.


Requirement.

Residential buildings undergoing major renovation.

 Where a residential building undergoing major renovation will have more than 10 associated parking spaces 

after the major renovation is completed

(a)   at least one associated parking space for the use of each dwelling must have access to an electric vehicle 

charge point;

(b)  cable routes for electric vehicle charge points must be installed in all additional associated parking spaces.


(2)  The requirements of paragraph S3 of Schedule 1 apply if

(a)   the major renovation involves building work being done which includes work being done to any of the 

following

 a car park that is located within the site boundary of the building, where the nature of the work 

is such that it would be reasonable to expect that work to include enabling the requirements of 

paragraph S3 of Schedule 1 to be fulfilled;

(ii)   the electrical infrastructure of a car park, where the car park is located within the site boundary of 

the building;

(iii)   the electrical infrastructure of the building, where a car park is located inside the building;

(b)   the residential building will have more than 10 associated parking spaces upon completion of that 

work;

(c)   subject to paragraph (3), all the required electric vehicle charge points can be accommodated within 

the incoming electrical supply to the building;

(d)   the cost of installing all the required electric vehicle charge points and cable routes for electric 

vehicle charge points does not exceed 7 of the total cost of the major renovation; and

(e) the residential building is not one in relation to which paragraph (5) applies.

(3) If paragraph (2)(a), (b), (d) and (e) applies, but all the required electric vehicle charge points cannot be 

accommodated within the incoming electrical supply to the building

(a) the requirements of paragraph S3 of Schedule 1 apply only in respect of the maximum number of 

electric vehicle charge points that can be accommodated within the incoming electrical supply to the 

building; and

(b) cable routes for electric vehicle charge points must be installed in all remaining associated parking 

spaces.


(4) If the cost of installing the required electric vehicle charge points and cable routes for electric vehicle 

charge points exceeds 7 of the total cost of the major renovation

(a) the residential building is exempt from the requirement to install any electric vehicle charge point;

(b) cable routes for electric vehicle charge points must be installed in all associated parking spaces, 

except where the cost of that installation exceeds 7 of the total cost of the major renovation.


(6) If a residential building undergoing major renovation has, or will have more than 10 associated parking 

spaces

(a)   if there are or will be any associated parking spaces situated in a position other than in a covered car 

park

 the requirements of paragraph S3 of Schedule 1 must first be applied in relation to those 

associated parking spaces; then

(ii)   cable routes for electric vehicle charge points must be installed in all the associated parking spaces 

in the covered car park;

(b)   if all the associated parking spaces are situated in a covered car park, cable routes for electric vehicle 

charge points must be installed in all the parking spaces in the covered car park.


Section 2: Material change of use and major 

renovations for residential buildings

Material change of use

2.1  Where associated parking spaces are provided for a building undergoing a material change of use of 

any of the following types, electric vehicle charge points should be provided.


c.  The building or part of a building which contains at least one dwelling, contains a greater or 

lesser number of dwellings than it did previously (regulation 5(g) of the Building Regulations).


2.2  Where requirement S2 applies, the number of associated parking spaces that have access to an 

electric vehicle charge point must be a minimum of either of the following.


The local authority's conservation 

officer should be asked to help assess whether complying with the requirements of the electric 

vehicle charge point installation regulations is reasonably practicable, on a casebycase basis.


2.6  When a material change of use is made to a building in a class in paragraph 2.3, when installing 

electric vehicle charge point infrastructure, the aim should be to not harm the character of the 

building.


Evidence should be given to the building control body to demonstrate that the electrical 

power supply is not sufficient.


This evidence should be written confirmation obtained from 

either the distribution network operator or a suitable expert.


As many electric vehicle charge points as can be accommodated within the existing power 

supply should be installed.


c.  Cable routes should be provided for the additional parking spaces which would have required 

an electric vehicle charge point if the electrical power supply were sufficient.


For parking spaces in a covered car park, the requirement to install electric vehicle charge points 

does not apply for those parking spaces and paragraphs 2.16 and 2.17 should be followed.


Major renovations of residential buildings.

2.10  For a residential building where all of the following apply, electric vehicle charge points should be 

provided for the associated parking spaces.


c. When work is complete, there will be more than 10 associated parking spaces for the use of the 

dwellings.


2.11  Where requirement S3 applies, the number of associated parking spaces that have access to an 

electric vehicle charge point must be a minimum of either of the following.


2.12  If there are associated parking spaces where there is not a requirement to install electric vehicle 

charge points, cable routes must be installed in all remaining associated parking spaces.


The cost of installing electric vehicle charge points and cable routes is not more than 7 of the 

total capital cost of the major renovation.


c.  Where the cost of installing electric vehicle charge points and cable routes is more than 7 

of the total cost of the major renovation, requirement S3 can be met by installing only cable 

routes in all associated parking spaces.


d.  Where the cost of installing only cable routes is more than 7 of the total cost of the major 

renovation, there is no requirement to install either electric vehicle charge points or cable routes.


The methodology for determining costs should be consistent 

between all elements of the calculation to allow a fair comparison between the cost of the major 

renovation and the cost of electric vehicle charge point infrastructure.


2.15  For associated parking spaces in a covered car park, the requirement to install electric vehicle 

charge points does not apply for those associated parking spaces and paragraphs 2.16 and 2.17 

should be followed.


Covered car parks in buildings undergoing material change 

of use or major renovation.

2.16  Where one or more associated parking spaces are within a covered car park, the requirement to 

install electric vehicle charge points should be met by installing charge points in associated parking 

spaces that are not within a covered car park.


2.17  If there are not enough associated parking spaces outside of the covered car park to meet the 

requirement to install electric vehicle charge points, then cable routes should be installed for 

associated parking spaces within the covered car park.


The total number of associated parking 

spaces which have access to either:

a.  cable routes

b.  an electric vehicle charge point

should be the greater of the following:

a.  the number of dwellings in the residential building

b.  the number of associated parking spaces.


Requirement.

Erection of new buildings which are not residential buildings or mixeduse buildings 

 Where a new building which is not a residential building or a mixeduse building has more than 10 parking 

spaces

(a)  one of those parking spaces must have access to one electric vehicle charge point; and

(b)   cable routes for electric vehicle charge points must be installed in a minimum of one fifth of the total 

number of remaining parking spaces.


(2)  If such a new building has, or will have, within its site boundary, more than 10 parking spaces

(a)  if there are or will be any parking spaces situated in a position other than in a covered car park

 the requirements of paragraph S4 of Schedule 1 must first be applied in relation to those parking 

spaces; then

(ii)   if the number of parking spaces which are situated in a position other than in a covered car park 

is insufficient to completely fulfil the requirements of paragraph S4 of Schedule 1, cable routes 

for electric vehicle charge points must be installed in a sufficient number of parking spaces in 

the covered car park in order to ensure compliance with the requirements of paragraph S4(b) of 

Schedule 1;

(b)   if all the parking spaces are situated in a covered car park, cable routes for electric vehicle charge 

points must be installed in a minimum of one fifth of the total number of those parking spaces.


For new buildings other than residential or mixeduse buildings with more than 10 parking 

spaces, both of the following are provided.


Cable routes for at least one in every five parking spaces, as set out in paragraphs 3.1 to 3.4.
 

Section 3: New buildings other than  

residential or mixeduse buildings.

3.1  For new buildings other than residential or mixeduse buildings with more than 10 parking spaces, both 

of the following apply.


One electric vehicle charge point must be provided for the building.


At least one in every five remaining parking spaces must be provided with cable routes.


NOTE: A minimum of one in every five means that, for example, if there are 11 parking spaces, two 

parking spaces must have access to cable routes in addition to the one parking space with access 

to an electric vehicle charge point.


3.3  Where any of the parking spaces for new buildings other than residential or mixeduse buildings are 

in a covered car park, the requirement to install an electric vehicle charge point should be met by 

installing a charge point in a parking space that is not within a covered car park.


Cable routes must still be provided for a minimum of one in 

five parking spaces.


Requirement.

Buildings undergoing major renovation which are not residential buildings or mixeduse buildings

 Where a building undergoing major renovation, which is not a residential building or a mixeduse building, will 

have more than 10 parking spaces after the major renovation is completed

(a)  one of those parking spaces must have access to one electric vehicle charge point; and

(b)   cable routes for electric vehicle charge points must be installed in a minimum of one fifth of the total 

number of remaining parking spaces.


(2)  The requirements of paragraph S5 of Schedule 1 apply to such a building if

(a)   the major renovation involves building work being done which includes work being done to any of the 

following

 a car park that is located within the site boundary of the building, where the nature of the work is 

such that it would be reasonable to expect the requirements of paragraph S5 of Schedule 1 to be 

fulfilled;

(ii)   the electrical infrastructure of a car park, where the car park is located within the site boundary of 

the building;

(iii)   the electrical infrastructure of the building, where a car park is located inside the building;

(b)   upon completion of that major renovation, the building will have more than 10 parking spaces situated 

within the site boundary of the building;

(c)   the cost of installing the required electric vehicle charge point and cable routes for electric vehicle 

charge points does not exceed 7 of the total cost of the major renovation.


(3) If the cost of installing the required electric vehicle charge point and cable routes for electric vehicle 

charge points exceeds 7 of the total cost of the major renovation

(a) such a building is exempt from the requirement to install the electric vehicle charge point; and

(b) cable routes for electric vehicle charge points must be installed in a minimum of one fifth of the total 

number of parking spaces, except where the cost of that installation exceeds 7 of the total cost of 

the major renovation.


(4) If such a building has, or will have, within its site boundary, more than 10 parking spaces

(a) if there are or will be any parking spaces situated in a position other than in a covered car park

 the requirements of paragraph S5 of Schedule 1 must first be applied in relation to those parking 

spaces; then

(ii)   if the number of parking spaces which are situated in a position other than in a covered car park 

is insufficient to completely fulfil the requirements of paragraph S5 of Schedule 1, cable routes for 

electric vehicle charge points must be installed in the number of parking spaces in the covered car 

park in order to ensure compliance with the requirements of paragraph S5(b) of Schedule 1;

(b)   if all the parking spaces are situated in a covered car park, cable routes for electric vehicle charge 

points must be installed in a minimum of one fifth of the total number of those parking spaces.


For major renovations to buildings other than dwellings with more than 10 parking spaces, both 

of the following are provided.


Cable routes for at least one in every five remaining parking spaces, as described in 

paragraphs 4.1 to 4.6.

Section 4: Major renovations of buildings which 

are not residential or mixeduse buildings.

4.1  For a building other than a residential or mixeduse building where all of the following apply, cable 

routes and electric vehicle charge points must be provided.


After work is complete, more than 10 parking spaces within the site boundary will be available 

for the use of building users.


One electric vehicle charge point must be installed.


A minimum of one in five of the remaining parking spaces must have access to cable routes.


NOTE: A minimum of one in every five means that, for example, if there are 11 parking spaces, 

two parking spaces must have access to cable routes in addition to the one parking space with an 

electric vehicle charge point.


Where the cost of installing at least one electric vehicle charge point and cable routes for at 

least one in every five remaining parking spaces is not more than 7 of the total cost of the 

major renovation, the requirements apply, as described in paragraphs 4.1 and 4.2. 

b. Where the cost of installing electric vehicle charge points and cable routes is more than 7 

of the total cost of the major renovation, requirement S4 and regulation 44H can be met by 

installing only cable routes in a minimum of one in five parking spaces.


c.  Where the cost of installing only cable routes is more than 7 of the total cost of the major 

renovation, there is no requirement to install either electric vehicle charge points or cable 

routes.


The methodology for determining costs should be consistent 

between all elements of the calculation to allow a fair comparison between the cost of the major 

renovation and the cost of electric vehicle charge point infrastructure.


4.5  Where one or more parking spaces are within a covered car park, the requirement to install electric 

vehicle charge points should be met by installing charge points in parking spaces that are not 

within a covered car park.


Cable routes must still be provided for a minimum of one in five parking 

spaces.


Cable routes must still be provided for a minimum of one in 

five parking spaces.


(2)   The requirements of paragraph S6 of Schedule 1 apply if, upon completion, such a mixeduse building will 

have at least one parking space situated within the site boundary of the building.


(3)   If such a mixeduse building has, or will have, within its site boundary, a covered car park

(a)   if there are or will be any parking spaces situated in a position other than in a covered car park

(i)   the requirements of paragraph S6 of Schedule 1 must first be applied in relation to those parking 

spaces; then

(ii)   if the number of parking spaces, which are situated in a position other than in a covered car park, 

is insufficient to completely fulfil the requirements of paragraph S6 of Schedule 1, cable routes for 

electric vehicle charge points must be installed in accordance with

(aa) 

 regulation 44D(4)(a), in relation to the associated parking spaces for one or more dwellings in 

a new mixeduse building;

(bb)   regulation 44F(6)(a), in relation to the associated parking spaces for one or more dwellings in a 

mixeduse building undergoing major renovation;

(cc) 

 regulation 44G(2)(a), in relation to the parking spaces for one or more premises that are not 

dwellings in a new mixeduse building;

(dd)   regulation 44H(4)(a), in relation to the parking spaces for one or more premises that are not 

dwellings in a mixeduse building undergoing major renovation;

(b)   if all the parking spaces are situated in a covered car park, cable routes for electric vehicle charge 

points must be installed in accordance with

 regulation 44D(4)(b), in relation to the associated parking spaces for one or more dwellings in a 

new mixeduse building;

(ii)   regulation 44F(6)(b), in relation to the associated parking spaces for one or more dwellings in a 

mixeduse building undergoing major renovation;

(iii)   regulation 44G(2)(b), in relation to the parking spaces for one or more new premises that are not 

dwellings in a new mixeduse building;

(iv)   regulation 44H(4)(b), in relation to the parking spaces for one or more premises that are not 

dwellings in a mixeduse building undergoing major renovation.


5.3  Where relevant work is undertaken on a mixeduse building, it should be determined which  

parking spaces are associated parking spaces for the use of occupants of the dwellings, and which 

parking spaces are for use by users of the nonresidential function of the building.


5.4  For mixeduse buildings which have parking spaces within a covered car park, any requirements to 

install electric vehicle charge points or cable routes must first be applied to those parking spaces 

outside the covered car park.


If the number of parking spaces outside the covered car park is insufficient to meet the 

requirements to install electric vehicle charge points and cable routes, the following guidance 

should be followed.


(1)   For the purposes of this Part and Part S of Schedule 1, an electric vehicle charge point must meet the 

following minimum standards.


(2)   It must be capable of providing a reasonable power output for each parking space for which it is intended 

to be used.


(3)  It must be run on a dedicated circuit.


(4)  It must be compatible with all vehicles which may require access to it.


Interpretation of this Part and Part S of Schedule 1.

cable route means a safe, unobstructed route from the power supply to the envisaged electric vehicle charge point 

location, for electrical cabling to be installed in the future.


b.  cable routes for an electric vehicle charge point to be installed in future

the location of the electric vehicle charge point or future connection location should be suitable 

for use by electric vehicles with charging inlets in different places.


6.4  Where accessible parking spaces are associated with the building and either

a.  future connection locations 

b.  electric vehicle charge points

are being provided to meet the requirements of this Approved Document, at least one accessible 

parking space should have access to either

c.  a future connection location.


NOTE: Standards for accessible parking spaces are described in Approved Document M.

6.5  A future connection location may be sited to serve more than one parking space if the cable routes 

are suitable for electric vehicle charge points to be installed in future that allow all spaces to be 

used at the same time for recharging  for example, if the cable routes are adequate for an electric 

vehicle charge point with multiple outlets, where each outlet has the functionality described in 

paragraph 6.2.


6.6  Where an electric vehicle charge point is sited to serve more than one parking space if the 

electric vehicle charge point should allow all spaces to be used at the same time for recharging 

 for example, an electric vehicle charge point with multiple outlets, where each outlet has the 

functionality described in paragraph 6.2.

6.7  For each parking space that requires cable routes, the following apply.


Cable routes should be provided from a metered electricity supply point to the future 

connection location.


All of the following should be provided.


6.8  When cable routes are being installed, a suitable strategy should be identified that meets both of 

the following.


6.9  As part of the cable routes, a dedicated safe and unobstructed route should be made from the 

electrical supply point to each identified future connection location that complies with both of 

the following.


All cable routes should be laid as straight as possible and with suitable access points, so that 

cables can be pulled through in future.


All space alongside the cable duct should be backfilled in a way that avoids damage to the 

duct.


c.  The termination points of cable duct should be sited where access to maintain in future is 

unrestricted.


e.  The point where a cable duct enters a building should be sealed to prevent water ingress and 

attack by vermin, and to comply with all relevant Building Regulations requirements (including 

Approved Document B).


Future connection locations.

6.11  Any future connection locations should be clearly identified and labelled.


Each letter should be 25mm high.


c.  The text should be displayed over three lines.


e.  The sign should be suitably weatherproof for its location.


f.  The sign should be sited where a person installing an electric vehicle charge point in future will 

see it.


Where 

vehicle barriers are necessary, sufficient space (for example 500mm) should be allowed around 

the future connection location.


NOTE: Guidance on the accessibility requirements of the Building Regulations, including on the 

location of sockets and switches, is given in Approved Document M.

NOTE: Except for the items marked  (which 

are from the Building Regulations 2010), these 

definitions apply only to Approved Document S. 

Accessible parking space A parking space that 

meets the provisions in Approved Document M.

Associated parking space Any parking space 

that is available within the site boundary of the 

building, for the use by the occupant of, or a 

visitor to, a dwelling in the building, including any 

parking space which is for the use of any occupant 

of, or any visitor to, any dwelling in a building 

containing more than one dwelling.


Major renovation The renovation of a building 

where more than 25 of the surface area of the 

building envelope undergoes renovation.


NOTE: The surface area of the whole building must 

be included when assessing whether the works 

constitute a major renovation, even if the building is 

mixed use.

Site boundary The boundary of the land in relation to 

a building, in respect of which building work is being 

carried out, means the boundary of the land, upon 

which that building is situated, that is controlled or 

owned by the same person who owns:

that building, or

in the case of the erection of a new building, 

the land upon which building work is being 

carried out.


