M1/M2 

Section 1: Access to buildings other 

than dwellings

OBJECTIVES

1.1  The aim is to provide a suitable 

means of access for people from the 

entrance point at the boundary of the site, 

and from any car parking that is provided 

on the site, to the building.


In designing an approach to the 

building, it should be recognised that 

changes in level are difficult for many 

people to negotiate, including wheelchair 

users, people who need to use walking 

aids and people with impaired sight.


1.4  The building should be designed, 

within the overall constraints of space, 

so that the difference in level between the 

entrance storey and the site entry point 

is minimised.


The site level 

of accessible entrances should be 

determined accordingly.


Generally, gradients within the approach 

should be as gentle as possible.


1.8  Where the gradient of the approach, 

whether over its whole length or in part, is 

1:20 or steeper, that part of the approach 

should be designed as ramped access.


1.9  All access routes to principal, or 

alternative accessible, entrances should be 

surfaced so that people are able to travel 

along them easily, without excessive effort 

and without the risk of tripping or falling.


1.10  There should be sufficient space for 

people to approach the building, pass 

others who are travelling in the opposite 

direction and carry out all necessary 

manoeuvres.


Access to and use of buildings other than dwellings Approved Document M Volume 2ACCESS TO BUILDINGS OTHER THAN DWELLINGS 

M1/M2

Provisions

1.13  A level approach (from the boundary 

of the site and from car parking spaces 

designated for disabled people to the 

principal entrance, to a staff entrance or 

to an alternative accessible entrance) will 

satisfy Requirement M1 or M2 if:

a.  it has a surface width of at least 1.5m, 

with passing places, free of obstructions 

to a height of 2.1m;

b.  passing places at least 1.8m wide and 

at least 2m long are provided within 

sight of each other (the width of the 

passing place may be included in the 

width of the level approach), but in any 

case spaced at a distance no greater 

than 50m;

c.  the gradient along its length is either 

no steeper than 1:60 along its whole 

length, or less steep than 1:20 with level 

landings (see 1.26(k)) introduced for 

each 500mm rise of the access (where 

necessary, between landings), in all 

cases with a crossfall gradient no 

steeper than 1:40;

d.  its surface is firm, durable and slip 

resistant, with undulations not exceeding 

3mm under a 1m straight edge for 

formless materials.


Inappropriate 

materials might be loose sand or gravel;

e.  where there are different materials along 

the access route, they have similar 

frictional characteristics;

f.  the difference in level at joints between 

paving units is no greater than 5mm, 

with joints filled flush or, if recessed, 

no deeper than 5mm and no wider than 

10mm or, if unfilled, no wider than 5mm;

g.  the route to the principal entrance 

(or alternative accessible entrance) is 

clearly identified and well lit;

 h. the danger of inadvertently walking into 

a vehicular access route is minimised 

by providing a separate pedestrian 

route and, where there is an uncontrolled 

crossing point across the vehicular route, 

this is identified by a buff coloured blister 

surface (see Diagram 1, and Guidance 

on the use of Tactile Paving Surfaces).


1.16  If people need to obtain tickets 

for pay and display parking, the ticket 

dispensing machines should be located in 

a way that allows a person in a wheelchair, 

or a person of short stature, to gain access 

close to the machine and reach the payment 

and ticket dispensing functions.


1.17  People with mobility impairments 

who arrive as passengers should be able 

to alight from a vehicle close to the 

principal entrance, or alternative accessible 

entrance, of the building in a way that is 

convenient for entry into the building.


Provisions

1.18  Car parking and setting down will 

satisfy Requirement M1 or M2 if:

a.  at least one parking bay designated for 

disabled people is provided on firm and 

level ground as close as feasible to the 

principal entrance of the building;

b.  the dimensions of the designated 

parking bays are as shown in Diagram 2 

(with a 1200mm accessibility zone 

between, and a 1200mm safety zone on 

the vehicular side of, the parking bays, 

and with a dropped kerb when there is 

a pedestrian route at the other side of 

the parking bay);

Diagram 2    Parking bay designated for 

disabled people

c.  the surface of the accessibility zone 

is firm, durable and slip resistant, with 

undulations not exceeding 3mm under a 

1m straight edge for formless materials.


Design considerations

1.19  If site constraints necessitate an 

approach of 1:20 or steeper, an approach 

incorporating ramped access should be 

provided.


1.20  Gradients should be as shallow as 

practicable, as steep gradients create 

difficulties for some wheelchair users who 

lack the strength to propel themselves up 

a slope or have difficulty in slowing down 

or stopping when descending.


Provisions

1.26  A ramped access will satisfy 

Requirement M1 or M2 if:

a.  either it is readily apparent or the 

approach to it is clearly signposted;

b.  the gradient of a ramp flight and its going 

between landings are in accordance 

with Table 1 and Diagram 3;

c.  no flight has a going greater than 10m, 

or a rise of more than 500mm;

Table 1   Limits for ramp gradients

Going of a flight  Maximum gradient  Maximum rise 

10m  

Note:

1:20  

1:15  

1:12  

500mm  

333mm  

166mm 

For goings between 2m and 10m, it is acceptable to interpolate 

between the maximum gradients, i.e.


Diagram 3    Relationship of ramp  

gradient to the going of  

a flight

d.  there is an alternative means of access 

for wheelchair users, e.g.


a lift, when 

the total rise is greater than 2m;

e.  it has a surface width between walls, 

upstands or kerbs of at least 1.5m;

Approved Document M Volume 2 Access to and use of buildings other than dwellings 

M1/M2  ACCESS TO BUILDINGS OTHER THAN DWELLINGS

f.  the ramp surface is slip resistant, 

especially when wet, and of a colour 

that contrasts visually with that of the 

landings;

1.28  The warning should be placed 

sufficiently in advance of the hazard to 

allow time to stop and not be so narrow 

that it might be missed in a single stride.


g.  the frictional characteristics of the ramp 

and landing surfaces are similar;

h.  there is a landing at the foot and head 

of the ramp at least 1.2m long and clear 

of any door swings or other obstructions;

i.  any intermediate landings are at least 

1.5m long and clear of any door swings 

or other obstructions;

intermediate landings at least 1800mm 

wide and 1800mm long are provided as 

passing places when it is not possible 

for a wheelchair user to see from one 

end of the ramp to the other or the 

ramp has three flights or more;

k.  all landings are level, subject to a 

maximum gradient of 1:60 along their 

length and a maximum crossfall 

gradient of 1:40;

there is a handrail on both sides;

m. there is a kerb on the open side of any 

ramp or landing at least 100mm high, 

which contrasts visually with the ramp 

or landing in addition to any guarding 

required under Part K;

n.  clearly signposted steps are provided, 

in addition, when the rise of the ramp 

is greater than 300mm (equivalent to 

2 x 150mm steps).


1.30  People should be able to appreciate 

easily where to place their feet by 

highlighting nosings and avoiding 

open rises.


It 

should be noted that excessive rounding 

of nosings reduces the effective going.


Provisions

1.33  A stepped access will satisfy 

Requirement M1 or M2 if:

a.  a level landing is provided at the top 

and bottom of each flight;

b.  the unobstructed length of each landing 

is not less than 1200mm;

c.  a corduroy hazard warning surface 

is provided at top and bottom landings 

of a series of flights to give advance 

warning of a change in level in 

accordance with Diagram 4;

Access to and use of buildings other than dwellings Approved Document M Volume 2ACCESS TO BUILDINGS OTHER THAN DWELLINGS 

M1/M2

Diagram 4   Stepped access  key dimensions and use of hazard warning surface

d.  where there is side access onto an 

intermediate landing, a corduroy 

hazard warning surface 400mm deep 

is provided either on the intermediate 

landing 400mm from both upper and 

lower flights, if there is sufficient space 

to accommodate the surface outside 

the line of the side access, or within the 

side access 400mm from the intermediate 

landing if there is a continuous handrail 

opposite the side access;

e.  no doors swing across landings;

it has flights whose surface width 

between enclosing walls, strings or 

upstands is not less than 1.2m;

g.  there are no single steps;

h.  the rise of a flight between landings 

contains no more than 12 risers for a 

going of less than 350mm and no more 

than 18 risers for a going of 350mm or 

greater (see Diagram 5);

i.  all nosings are made apparent by 

means of a permanently contrasting 

material 55mm wide on both the tread 

and the riser;

the projection of a step nosing over the 

tread below is avoided but, if necessary, 

not more than 25mm (see Diagram 6);

Approved Document M Volume 2 Access to and use of buildings other than dwellingsM1/M2  ACCESS TO BUILDINGS OTHER THAN DWELLINGS

Diagram 5    External steps and stairs  

key dimensions

Diagram 6    Examples of acceptable step 

profiles and key dimensions 

for external stairs

k.  the rise and going of each step is 

consistent throughout a flight;

the rise of each step is between 150mm 

and 170mm, except adjacent to existing 

buildings where, due to dimensional 

constraints, the case for a different rise 

is agreed with the building control body;

m. the going of each step is between 

280mm and 425mm;

n.  rises are not open;

o.  there is a continuous handrail on each 

side of a flight and landings;

p.  additional handrails divide the flight into 

channels not less than 1m wide and not 

more than 1.8m wide where the overall 

unobstructed width is more than 1.8m.


1.35  Handrails should be spaced away 

from the wall and rigidly supported in a 

way that avoids impeding finger grip.


1.36  Handrails should be set at heights 

that are convenient for all users of the 

building and should extend safely beyond 

the top and bottom of a flight of steps, or 

a ramp, to give both stability and warning 

of the presence of a change in level.


Consideration should be given to the 

provision of a second handrail on stairs 

in a wide range of building types, and 

particularly in schools, for use by children 

and people of short stature.


Provisions

1.37  Handrailing to external ramped and 

stepped access will satisfy Requirement 

M1 or M2 if:

Access to and use of buildings other than dwellings Approved Document M Volume 2ACCESS TO BUILDINGS OTHER THAN DWELLINGS 

M1/M2

a.  the vertical height to the top of the 

upper handrail from the pitch line of the 

surface of a ramp, or a flight of steps, 

is between 900mm and 1000mm, and 

from the surface of a landing is between 

900 and 1100mm (see Diagram 5);

b.  where there is full height structural 

guarding, the vertical height to the top of 

a second lower handrail from the pitch 

line of the surface of a ramp, or a flight 

of steps, is 600mm, where provided;

c.  it is continuous across the flights and 

landings of ramped or stepped access;

d.  it extends at least 300mm horizontally 

beyond the top and bottom of a ramped 

access, or the top and bottom nosing 

of a flight or flights of steps, while not 

projecting into an access route;

e.  it contrasts visually with the background 

against which it is seen, without being 

highly reflective;

its surface is slip resistant and not cold 

to the touch, in areas where resistance 

to vandalism or low maintenance are 

key factors, use of metals with relatively 

low thermal conductivity may be 

appropriate;

g.  it terminates in a way that reduces the 

risk of clothing being caught;

h.  its profile is either circular with a diameter 

between 32 and 50mm, or noncircular, 

50mm wide and 39 mm deep having 

rounded edges with a radius a minimum 

of 15mm (see Diagram 7);

it protrudes no more than 100mm into 

the surface width of the ramped or 

stepped access where this would 

impinge on the stair width requirement 

of Part B1;

there is a clearance of between 50 and 

75mm between the handrail and any 

adjacent wall surface;

k.  there is a clearance of at least 50mm 

between a cranked support and the 

underside of the handrail;

its inner face is located no more than 

50mm beyond the surface width of the 

ramped or stepped access.


2.5  Accessible entrances should be 

clearly signposted and easily recognisable.


by lighting 

and/or visual contrast;

c.  any structural supports at the entrance 

do not present a hazard for visually 

impaired people;

d.  there is a level landing at least 1500 x 

1500mm, clear of any door swings, 

immediately in front of the entrance and 

of a material that does not impede the 

movement of wheelchairs;

e.  the threshold is level or, if a raised 

threshold is unavoidable, it has a total 

height of not more than 15mm, a 

minimum number of upstands and 

slopes, with any upstands higher than 

5mm chamfered or rounded;

f.  any door entry systems are accessible 

to deaf and hard of hearing people, and 

people who cannot speak;

g.  weather protection is provided at 

manual nonpowered entrance doors;

h.  internal floor surfaces adjacent to the 

threshold are of materials that do not 

impede the movement of wheelchairs, 

e.g.


Provisions

Doors to accessible entrances

2.7  Accessible entrances will satisfy 

Requirement M1 or M2 if:

a.  they are clearly signposted, incorporating 

the International Symbol of Access, 

from the edge of the site and from the 

principal entrance (if this is not accessible);

b.  they are easily identified among the 

other elements of the building and the 

Design considerations

2.8  Doors to the principal, or alternative 

accessible, entrance should be accessible 

to all, particularly wheelchair users and 

people with limited physical dexterity.


Entrance doors should be capable 

of being held closed when not in use.


2.11  Once open, all doors to accessible 

entrances should be wide enough to allow 

unrestricted passage for a variety of users, 

including wheelchair users, people carrying 

luggage, people with assistance dogs, and 

parents with pushchairs and small children.


It should be noted that double buggies are 

wider than wheelchairs and that, where 

relevant to the building type, this should 

be borne in mind when determining an 

appropriate effective clear width for an 

entrance door.


2.12  People should be able to see other 

people approaching from the opposite 

direction, thereby allowing sufficient reaction 

time for both parties to avoid a collision.


Provisions

2.13  Doors to accessible entrances will 

satisfy Requirement M1 or M2 if:

a.  where required to be selfclosing, a 

poweroperated door opening and 

closing system is used when through 

calculation and experience it appears 

that it will not be possible otherwise for 

a person to open the door using a force 

not more than 30N at the leading edge 

from 0 (the door in the closed position) 

to 30 open, and not more than 22.5N 

at the leading edge from 30 to 60 of 

the opening cycle;

b.  the effective clear width through a 

single leaf door, or one leaf of a double 

leaf door, is in accordance with Table 2, 

and the rules for measurement are in 

accordance with Diagram 9;

c.  they are installed in accordance with 

Approved Document K, section 10.


Table 2     Minimum effective clear 

widths of doors

Direction and  

width of approach 

Straighton (without a turn or  

oblique approach)

Existing 

buildings  buildings 

(mm) 

At right angles to an access route  

at least 1500mm wide

At right angles to an access route  

at least 1200mm wide

External doors to buildings used  

by the general public

1000 

Note:

The effective clear width is the width of the opening measured at 

right angles to the wall in which the door is situated from the outside 

of the door stop on the door closing side to any obstruction on 

the hinge side, whether this be projecting door opening furniture, 

a weather board, the door or the door stop (see Diagram 9).


2.15  A space alongside the leading edge 

of a door should be provided to enable 

a wheelchair user to reach and grip the 

door handle, then open the door without 

releasing hold on the handle and without 

the footrest colliding with the return wall.


2.16  Door furniture on manually operated 

nonpowered doors should be easy to 

operate by people with limited manual 

dexterity, and be readily apparent against 

the background of the door.


Provisions

2.17  Manually operated nonpowered 

entrance doors will satisfy Requirement M1 

or M2 if:

a.  the opening force at the leading edge  

of the door is not more than 30N at the 

leading edge from 0 (the door in the 

closed position) to 30 open, and not 

more than 22.5N at the leading edge 

from 30 to 60 of the opening cycle;

b.  there is an unobstructed space of at 

least 300mm on the pull side of the door  

between the leading edge of the door 

and any return wall, unless the door is a 

powered entrance door (see Diagram 9);

c.  where fitted with a latch, the door opening  

furniture can be operated with one hand 

using a closed fist, e.g.


2.19  Manual controls for powered entrance 

doors should be clearly distinguishable 

against the background and not located 

so that a person, having used the control, 

needs to move to avoid contact with the 

door as it opens.


If a revolving 

door is used, an entrance door complying 

with 2.17 or 2.21 should be provided 

immediately adjacent to it and signed 

to show that it is accessible.


2.23  The presence of the door should be 

apparent not only when it is shut but also 

when it is open.


Where it can be held open, 

steps should be taken to avoid people 

being harmed by walking into the door.


2.28  The aim should be to reduce 

potential hazards from local obstructions 

within the lobby and minimise distracting 

reflections from glazing.


2.27  The lobby should be large enough and  

of a shape to allow a wheelchair user or a 

person pushing a pram to move clear of one  

door before opening the second door.


The minimum 

length of the lobby is related to the chosen 

b.  their length with double swing doors is 

at least (DP1  DP2  1570mm);

c.  their width (excluding any projections 

into the space) is at least 1200mm (or 

(DL1 or DL2)  300mm) whichever is the 

greater when single leaf doors are used, 

and at least 1800mm when double leaf 

doors are used;

d.  glazing within the lobby does not create 

distracting reflections;

e.  floor surface materials within the 

lobby do not impede the movement of 

wheelchairs, e.g.


not coir matting, and 

changes in floor materials do not create 

a potential trip hazard;

f.  the floor surface helps to remove 

rainwater from shoes and wheelchairs;

g.  where mat wells are provided, the 

surface of the mat is level with the 

surface of the adjacent floor finish;

h.  any columns, ducts and similar full height  

elements that project into the lobby by 

more than 100mm are protected by a 

visually contrasting guard rail.


3.3  Where a service building has a 

reception or sales counter, there should 

be convenient access to it and part of it 

should be at a level suitable for a wheelchair 

user or a seated person.


3.4  Designers should also be aware that 

glazed screens in front of the reception 

point, or light sources or reflective wall 

surfaces, such as glazed screens, located 

behind the reception point, could 

compromise the ability of a person with 

a hearing impairment to lip read or follow 

sign language.


It should be possible for information 

about the building to be easily obtained 

from a reception point or gathered from 

notice boards and signs.


Provisions

3.6  An entrance hall and reception area 

will satisfy Requirement M1 or M2 if:

a.  any reception point is located away 

from the principal entrance (while still 

providing a view of it) where there is a 

risk that external noise will be a problem;

b.  any reception point is easily identifiable 

from the entrance doors or lobby, and 

the approach to it is direct and free from 

obstructions;

c.  the design of the approach to any 

reception point allows space for 

wheelchair users to gain access to 

the reception point;

d.  the clear manoeuvring space in front 

of any reception desk or counter is 

1200mm deep and 1800mm wide if 

there is a knee recess at least 500mm 

deep, or 1400mm deep and 2200mm 

wide if there is no knee recess;

e.  any reception desk or counter is designed 

to accommodate both standing and 

seated visitors such that at least one 

section of the counter is at least 1500mm 

wide, with its surface no higher than 

760mm, and a knee recess, not less 

than 700mm, above floor level;

f.  any reception point is provided with a 

hearing enhancement system, e.g.


Internal doors

Design considerations

3.7  Since doors are potential barriers, 

their use should be avoided whenever 

appropriate.


If doors are required, the use 

of selfclosing devices should be minimised 

(particularly in parts of buildings used by 

the general public) since, as described in 

2.14, they disadvantage many people who 

have limited upper body strength, are 

pushing prams or are carrying heavy objects.


Where closing devices are needed for fire 

control, electrically powered holdopen 

devices or swingfree closing devices 

should be used as appropriate.


3.8  The presence of doors, whether open 

or closed, should be apparent to visually 

impaired people through the careful choice 

of colour and material for the door and its 

surroundings.


For example, when a door is 

open, people with impaired sight should be 

able to identify the door opening within the 

wall, as well as the leading edge of the door.


3.9  Other design considerations for 

internal doors are as set out in 2.14 to 2.16 

under Manually operated nonpowered 

entrance doors and should be referred to 

for guidance.


Provisions

3.10  Internal doors will satisfy Requirement 

M1 or M2 if:

a.  where needing to be opened manually, 

the opening force at the leading edge 

of the door is not more than 30N from 

0 (the door in the closed position) to 

30 open, and not more than 22.5N 

from 30 to 60 of the opening cycle;

b.  the effective clear width through a 

single leaf door, or one leaf of a double 

leaf door, is in accordance with Table 2 

and Diagram 9;

c.  there is an unobstructed space of at 

least 300mm on the pull side of the 

door between the leading edge of the 

door and any return wall, unless the 

door has powercontrolled opening or 

it provides access to a standard hotel 

bedroom;

d.  where fitted with a latch, the door 

opening furniture can be operated with 

one hand using a closed fist, e.g.


a 

lever handle;

e.  all door opening furniture contrasts 

visually with the surface of the door;

f.  the door frames contrast visually with 

the surrounding wall;

g.  the surface of the leading edge of any 

door that is not selfclosing, or is likely 

to be held open, contrasts visually 

with the other door surfaces and its 

surroundings;

h.  where appropriate in door leaves or side 

panels wider than 450mm, vision panels 

towards the leading edge of the door 

have vertical dimensions which include 

at least the minimum zone, or zones, of 

visibility between 500mm and 1500mm 

from the floor, if necessary interrupted 

between 800mm and 1150mm above 

the floor, e.g.


3.12  In order to help people with visual 

impairment to appreciate the size of a 

space they have entered, or to find their 

way around, there should be a visual 

contrast between the wall and the ceiling, 

and between the wall and the floor.


Such 

attention to surface finishes should be 

coupled with good natural and artificial 

lighting design.


3.13  Good acoustic design should be 

employed to achieve an acoustic environment 

that is neither too reverberant nor too 

absorbent so that announcements and 

conversations can be heard clearly.


Provisions

d.  the floor is level or predominantly level 

(with a gradient no steeper than 1:60), 

with any section with a gradient of 1:20 

or steeper designed as an internal ramp 

and in accordance with Table 1 and 

Diagram 3;

e.  where a section of the floor has a 

gradient, in the direction of travel, 

steeper than 1:60, but less steep than 

1:20, it rises no more than 500mm 

without a level rest area at least 1500mm 

long (with a gradient no steeper than 1:60);

f.  any sloping section extends the full 

width of the corridor or, if not, the 

exposed edge is clearly identified by 

visual contrast and, where necessary, 

protected by guarding;

g.  any door opening towards a corridor, 

which is a major access route or an 

escape route, should be recessed so 

that, when fully open, it does not project 

into the corridor space, except where 

the doors are to minor utility facilities, 

such as small store rooms and locked 

duct cupboards;

h.  any door from a unisex wheelchair

accessible toilet projects when open 

into a corridor that is not a major 

access route or an escape route, 

provided the corridor is at least 

1800mm wide at that point;

3.14  Corridors and passageways will 

satisfy Requirement M1 or M2 if:

a.  elements such as columns, radiators 

and fire hoses do not project into the 

corridor, or where this is unavoidable, a 

means of directing people around them, 

such as a visually contrasting guard rail, 

is provided;

i.  on a major access route or an escape 

route, the wider leaf of a series of 

double doors with leaves of unequal 

width is on the same side of the corridor 

throughout the length of the corridor;

floor surface finishes with patterns that 

could be mistaken for steps or changes 

of level are avoided;

b.  they have an unobstructed width 

k.  floor finishes are slip resistant;

(excluding any projections into the space) 

along their length of at least 1200mm;

c.  where they have an unobstructed width 

of less than 1800mm, they have passing 

places at least 1800mm long and with 

an unobstructed width of at least 1800mm 

at reasonable intervals, e.g.


Approved Document M Volume 2 Access to and use of buildings other than dwellingsHORIZONTAL AND VERTICAL CIRCULATION IN BUILDINGS 

M1/M2  OTHER THAN DWELLINGS

3.18  Signs indicating the location of 

a lifting device accessible by mobility

impaired people should be clearly visible 

from the building entrance.


Additionally, a 

sign identifying the floor reached should be 

provided on each landing in a location that 

can be easily seen from the lifting device 

and is designed so that it contrasts visually 

with its surrounding.


3.19  Whatever lifting device is chosen, 

internal stairs should always be provided 

as an alternative means of vertical access, 

and designed to suit ambulant disabled 

people and those with impaired sight.


3.23  In exceptional circumstances in an 

existing building, a wheelchair platform 

stairlift may be considered, provided 

its installation does not conflict with 

requirements for means of escape.


Provisions

3.16  Internal lobbies will satisfy 

Requirement M1 or M2 if:

a.  their length with single swing doors is 

in accordance with Diagram 10;

b.  their length with double swing doors is 

at least (DP1  DP2  1570mm);

c.  their width (excluding any projections 

into the space) is at least 1200mm (or 

(DL1 or DL2)  300mm) whichever is the 

greater when single leaf doors are used, 

and at least 1800mm when double leaf 

doors are used;

d.  glazing within the lobby does not create 

distracting reflections;

e.  any junctions of floor surface materials 

at the entrance to the lobby area do not 

create a potential trip hazard;

f.  any columns, ducts and similar full 

height elements that project into the 

lobby by more than 100mm are protected 

by a visually contrasting guard rail.


Vertical circulation within 

the building

Design considerations

3.17  A passenger lift is the most suitable 

means of vertical access and should be 

provided wherever possible.


General requirements for 

lifting devices

Design considerations

3.25  In selecting the appropriate lifting 

device care should be taken to ensure it is 

fit for purpose.


3.27  All users including wheelchair users 

should be able to reach and use the controls 

that summon and direct the lifting device.


Provisions

3.28  The installation of lifting devices will 

satisfy Requirement M1 or M2 if:

a.  there is an unobstructed manoeuvring 

space of 1500mm x 1500mm, or a 

straight access route 900mm wide, 

in front of each lifting device;

b.  the landing call buttons are located 

between 900mm and 1100mm from the 

floor of the landing and at least 500mm 

from any return wall;

c.  the landing call button symbols, where 

provided, and lifting device control 

button symbols are raised to facilitate 

tactile reading;

d.  all call and control buttons contrast 

visually with the surrounding face plate, 

and the face plate similarly contrasts 

with the surface on which it is mounted;

e.  the floor of the lifting device should not 

be of a dark colour and should have 

frictional qualities similar to, or higher 

than, the floor of the landing;

f.  a handrail is provided on at least one 

wall of the lifting device with its top 

surface at 900mm (nominal) above the 

floor and located so that it does not 

obstruct the controls or the mirror;

g.  a suitable emergency communication 

system is fitted.


3.30  Lift door systems should be designed 

to allow adequate time for people, and any 

assistance dogs, to enter or leave the lift 

without coming into contact with closing doors.


Particular 

applications for passenger and good 

passenger lifts, or, where necessary, 

by product certification issued by a 

Notified Body);

b.  they are accessible from the remainder 

of the storey;

c.  the minimum dimensions of the lift cars 

are 1100mm wide and 1400mm deep 

(see Diagram 11);

d.  for lifts of a size that does not allow a 

wheelchair user to turn around within 

the lift car, a mirror is provided in the lift 

car to enable a wheelchair user to see 

the space behind the wheelchair;

e.  poweroperated horizontal sliding doors 

provide an effective clear width of at 

least 800mm (nominal);

f.  doors are fitted with timing devices and 

reopening activators to allow adequate 

time for people and any assistance 

dogs to enter or leave;

g.  car controls are located between 900mm 

and 1200mm (preferably 1100mm) from 

the car floor and at least 400mm from 

any return wall;

h.  landing call buttons are located between 

900mm and 1100mm from the floor of 

the landing and at least 500mm from 

any return wall;

lift landing and car doors are 

distinguishable visually from the 

adjoining walls;

Diagram 11   Key dimensions associated with passenger lifts

Access to and use of buildings other than dwellings Approved Document M Volume 2 

HORIZONTAL AND VERTICAL CIRCULATION IN BUILDINGS 

OTHER THAN DWELLINGS 

M1/M2

j.  audible and visual indication of lift 

arrival and location is provided in the lift 

car and the lift lobby;

k.  areas of glass are identifiable by people 

with impaired vision;

l.  where the lift is to be used to evacuate 

disabled people in an emergency, it 

conforms to the relevant recommendations 

of BS 55888.


3.36  All users including wheelchair users 

should be able to reach and use the controls 

that summon and direct the lifting platform.


However, another means of continuous 

pressure control may need to be considered 

to accommodate the needs of users with 

varying degrees of manual dexterity.


Where 

management control cannot be exercised, 

particular attention should be paid to the 

products designed duty cycle.


3.42  The use of visually and acoustically 

reflective wall surfaces should be minimised 

within the lifting platform to prevent 

discomfort for people with visual and 

hearing impairment.


In the absence of relevant harmonised 

European Standards, products with 

a travel exceeding 3m must have a 

product certificate issued by a 

Notified Body);

b.  the vertical travel distance is:

i.  not more than 2m, where there is 

no liftway enclosure and no floor 

penetration;

ii.


more than 2m, where there is a 

liftway enclosure;

c.  the rated speed of the platform does 

not exceed 0.15m/s;

d.  lifting platform controls are located 

between 800mm and 1100mm from the 

floor of the lifting platform and at least 

400mm from any return wall;

e.  continuous pressure controls are 

provided;

landing call buttons are located 

between 900mm and 1100mm from the 

floor of the landing and at least 500mm 

from any return wall;

g.  the minimum clear dimensions of the 

platform are:

i.


However, another 

means of continuous pressure control may 

need to be considered to accommodate users 

with varying degrees of manual dexterity.


Provisions

3.49  Wheelchair platform stairlifts will 

satisfy Requirement M1 or M2 if 

a.  they conform to the requirements of the 

Supply of Machinery (Safety) Regulations 

1992, SI 1992/3073 (Note: These 

regulations may be met by compliance, 

among other things, with the relevant 

British Standards, EN81 series of 

standards or where necessary Notified 

Body approval);

b.  in a building with a single stairway, 

the required clear width of the flight of 

stairs and landings for means of escape 

is maintained when the wheelchair 

platform is in the parked position 

(see also Approved Document B);

c.  the rated speed of the platform does 

not exceed 0.15m/s;

d.  continuous pressure controls are 

provided;

e.  the minimum clear dimensions of 

the platform are 800mm wide and 

1250mm deep;

f.  they are fitted with clear instructions 

for use;

g.  access with an effective clear width of 

at least 800mm is provided;

h.  controls are designed to prevent 

unauthorised use.


For mobilityimpaired people, a going of 

at least 300mm is preferred.


Unless, therefore, a ramp 

is short, has a shallow gradient and the rise 

is no more than the minimum that can be 

provided by two risers, steps should be 

provided as well as a ramp.


4.2  Where permanent or removable 

seating is provided as part of the design, 

allowance should be made for disabled 

people to have a choice of seating location 

at spectator events.


In refreshment facilities, bars and 

counters (or sections of them) should be 

at a level suitable for wheelchair users.


All 

floor areas, even when located at different 

levels, should be accessible.


4.4  A proportion of the sleeping 

accommodation in hotels, motels and 

student accommodation should be designed 

for independent use by wheelchair users.


They should be provided with 

spaces into which they can manoeuvre 

easily, and which offer them a clear view 

of an event, while ensuring they are not 

segregated into special areas.


Consideration should be given to 

providing an area next to certain seats for 

an assistance dog to rest.


4.8  All users of facilities should be able 

to locate suitable seating and move safely 

and easily to and from the seating area and 

ancillary accommodation, such as lavatories, 

dining rooms and bedroom suites.


Lecture/conference facilities

4.9  People with hearing impairments 

should be able to participate fully in 

conferences, committee meetings and 

study groups.


All people should be able to 

use presentation facilities.


Consideration 

should be given to good sight lines and the 

design and location of lecture equipment 

(demonstration table, lectern, projection 

Access to and use of buildings other than dwellings Approved Document M Volume 2FACILITIES IN BUILDINGS OTHER THAN DWELLINGS 

screen) to ensure that patterned walls, 

poor interior lighting or very bright natural 

backlighting does not have a detrimental 

effect on the ability of people to receive 

information from a sign language interpreter 

or a lip speaker (see 4.32 to 4.34).


Provisions

4.12  Audience and spectator facilities will 

satisfy Requirement M1 if:

For audience seating generally

a.  the route to wheelchair spaces is 

accessible by wheelchair users;

b.  stepped access routes to audience 

seating are provided with fixed handrails 

(see 1.34 to 1.37 for details of handrails);

c.  the minimum number of permanent and 

removable spaces provided for wheelchair 

users is in accordance with Table 3;

Table 3    Provision of wheelchair space 

in audience seating

Seating 

capacity 

  Minimum provision of 

 spaces for wheelchairs

Permanent 

Removable

Up to 600 

1 of total seating 

capacity (rounded up)   

  Remainder to make 

a total of 6

1 of total seating 

capacity (rounded up)   

  Additional provision, 

if desired 

Over 600 

but less than 

10,000

Note:

For seating capacities of 10,000 or more, guidance is given in 

Accessible stadia: a good practice guide to the design of facilities 

to meet the needs of disabled spectators and other users.


d.  some wheelchair spaces (whether 

permanent or created by removing 

seats) are provided in pairs, with 

standard seating on at least one side 

(see Diagram 13);

Diagram 13    An example of wheelchair 

spaces in a lecture theatre

e.  where more than two wheelchair spaces 

are provided, they are located to give 

a range of views of the event at each 

side, as well as at the front and back 

of the seating area;

f.  the minimum clear space provided for 

access to wheelchair spaces is 900mm;

g.  the clear space allowance for an 

occupied wheelchair in a parked position 

is 900mm wide by 1400mm deep;

h.  the floor of each wheelchair space is 

horizontal;

Approved Document M Volume 2 Access to and use of buildings other than dwellings 

FACILITIES IN BUILDINGS OTHER THAN DWELLINGS

Provisions

4.16  Refreshment facilities will satisfy 

Requirement M1 if:

a.  all users have access to all parts of 

the facility;

b.  part of the working surface of a bar or 

serving counter is permanently accessible 

to wheelchair users, and at a level of 

not more than 850mm above the floor 

and, where necessary, part at a higher 

level for people standing;

c.  the worktop of a shared refreshment 

facility (e.g.


for tea making) is at 850mm 

above the floor with a clear space 

beneath at least 700mm above the floor 

(see Diagram 16) and the delivery of 

water complies with 5.4(a) and (b);

d.  a wheelchairaccessible threshold 

(see 2.7(e)) is located at the transition 

between an external seating area and 

the interior of the facility.


i.  some seats are located so that an 

assistance dog can accompany its 

owner and rest in front of, or under, 

the seat;

j.  standard seats at the ends of rows 

and next to wheelchair spaces have 

detachable, or liftup, arms;

For seating on a stepped terraced floor

k.  wheelchair spaces at the back of a 

stepped terraced floor are provided 

in accordance with Diagram 14 or 15, 

the arrangement in Diagram 15 being 

particularly suitable for entertainment 

buildings, such as theatres or cinemas, 

subject to the approval of the licensing 

authority;

For lecture/conference facilities

l.  where a podium or stage is provided, 

wheelchair users have access to it by 

means of a ramp or lifting platform;

m. a hearing enhancement system in 

accordance with 4.36 is provided for 

people with impaired hearing.


Refreshment facilities

Design considerations

4.13  Refreshment facilities, such as 

restaurants and bars, should be designed so 

that they can be reached and used by all 

people independently or with companions.


4.14  All public areas, including lavatory 

accommodation, public telephones and 

external terraces should be accessible.


Access to and use of buildings other than dwellings Approved Document M Volume 2FACILITIES IN BUILDINGS OTHER THAN DWELLINGS 

Diagram 14   Possible location of wheelchair spaces in front of a rear aisle

Diagram 15   An example of wheelchair space provision in a cinema or theatre

Approved Document M Volume 2 Access to and use of buildings other than dwellingsM1 

FACILITIES IN BUILDINGS OTHER THAN DWELLINGS

4.19  Wheelchairaccessible bedrooms 

should be sufficiently spacious to enable a 

wheelchair user to transfer to one side of a 

bed, with or without assistance.


Wheelchair 

users should be able to manoeuvre around 

and use the facilities in the room, and 

operate switches and controls.


Unless there are compelling reasons for 

not doing so, there should be at least as 

many ensuite shower rooms as ensuite 

bathrooms, as mobilityimpaired people 

may find it easier to use a shower than a 

bath.


4.18  Wheelchair users should be able to 

reach all the facilities available within the 

building.


In general, accessible bedrooms 

should be no less advantageously situated 

than other bedrooms.


It would be beneficial 

if entrance doors to wheelchairaccessible 

bedrooms were powered opening, as this 

could avoid the need for the 300mm 

access space adjacent to the leading 

edge of the door.


Access to and use of buildings other than dwellings Approved Document M Volume 2FACILITIES IN BUILDINGS OTHER THAN DWELLINGS 

Provisions

4.24  Sleeping accommodation will satisfy 

Requirement M1 if:

For all bedrooms

a.  the effective clear width of the door 

from the access corridor complies 

with Table 2;

b.  swing doors, where provided for builtin 

wardrobes and other storage systems, 

open through 180;

c.  handles on hinged and sliding doors are 

easy to grip and operate and contrast 

visually with the surface of the door;

d.  openable windows and window controls 

are located between 800 and 1000mm 

above the floor and are easy to operate 

without using both hands simultaneously;

e.  all bedrooms have a visual fire alarm 

signal, in addition to the requirements 

of Part B;

f.  any room numbers are indicated in 

embossed characters;

For wheelchairaccessible bedrooms

g.  at least one wheelchairaccessible 

bedroom is provided for every 20 

bedrooms, or part thereof;

h.  wheelchairaccessible bedrooms are 

located on accessible routes that lead 

to all other available facilities within 

the building;

i.  wheelchairaccessible bedrooms 

are designed to provide a choice of 

location and have a standard of amenity 

equivalent to that of other bedrooms;

the door from the access corridor to a 

wheelchairaccessible bedroom complies 

with the relevant provisions of Internal 

doors (see 3.10), in particular the 

maximum permissible opening force, 

Table 2 and the need for a clear space 

of 300mm from the leading edge of the 

door to the side wall;

k.  the effective clear width of any door to 

an ensuite bathroom or shower room 

within the wheelchairaccessible 

bedroom complies with Table 2;

the size of wheelchairaccessible 

bedrooms allows for a wheelchair user 

to manoeuvre at the side of a bed, then 

transfer independently to it.


4.27  All users should be able to locate a 

control, know which setting it is on and use 

it without inadvertently changing its setting.


Provisions

4.30  Switches, outlets and controls will 

satisfy Requirement M1 if:

a.  wallmounted socket outlets, telephone 

points and TV sockets are located 

between 400mm and 1000mm above 

the floor, with a preference for the lower 

end of the range;

b.  switches for permanently wired 

appliances are located between 400mm 

and 1200mm above the floor, unless 

needed at a higher level for particular 

appliances;

c.  all switches and controls that require 

precise hand movements are located 

between 750mm and 1200mm above 

the floor;

d.  simple push button controls that require 

limited dexterity are not more than 

1200mm above the floor;

Access to and use of buildings other than dwellings Approved Document M Volume 2FACILITIES IN BUILDINGS OTHER THAN DWELLINGS 

e.  pull cords for emergency alarm systems 

are coloured red, located as close to 

a wall as possible and have two red 

50mm diameter bangles, one set at 

100mm and the other set between 

800mm and 1000mm above the floor;

f.  controls that need close vision are 

located between 1200mm and 1400mm 

above the floor so that readings may be 

taken by a person sitting or standing (with 

thermostats at the top of the range);

g.  socket outlets are located consistently 

in relation to doorways and room 

corners, but in any case no nearer 

than 350mm from room corners;

h.  light switches for use by the general 

public have large push pads and align 

horizontally with door handles within 

the range 900 to 1100mm, for ease of 

location when entering a room;

i.  where switches described in 4.30(h) 

cannot be provided, lighting pull cords 

are set between 900mm and 1100mm 

above floor level, and fitted with a 

50mm diameter bangle visually 

contrasting with its background and 

distinguishable visually from any 

emergency assistance pull cord;

the operation of switches, outlets and 

controls does not require the simultaneous 

use of both hands, except where this 

mode of operation is necessary for 

safety reasons;

k.  switched socket outlets indicate 

whether they are on;

l.  mains and circuit isolator switches 

clearly indicate that they are on or off;

m. front plates contrast visually with their 

backgrounds.


For 

example, glare and reflections from shiny 

surfaces, and large repeating patterns, 

should be avoided in spaces where visual 

acuity is critical as they will hamper 

communication for people with impaired 

vision, and those who lip read or use sign 

language.


4.33  The type and quality of public address, 

hearing enhancement and telephone 

systems should be chosen carefully to 

ensure intelligibility.


4.34  Artificial lighting should be designed 

to give good colour rendering of all surfaces, 

without creating glare or pools of bright light 

and strong shadows.


Uplighters mounted at low 

or floor level can disorientate some visually 

impaired people and should be avoided.


It 

should be recognised that there is the 

danger where adjacent spaces each have 

an induction loop system that the signals 

may overlap.


Access to and use of buildings other than dwellings Approved Document M Volume 2Section 5: Sanitary accommodation in 

buildings other than dwellings

M1/M3

OBJECTIVES

In principle, suitable sanitary 

accommodation should be available to 

everybody, including sanitary accommodation 

designed for wheelchair users, ambulant 

disabled people, people of either sex 

with babies and small children or people 

encumbered by luggage.


Taps and WC cubicle doors 

should be operable by people with limited 

strength or manual dexterity and doors 

to cubicles should be capable of being 

opened if a person has collapsed against 

them while inside the cubicle.


by lever action;

b.  terminal fittings comply with Guidance 

Note G18.5 of the Guidance Document 

relating to Schedule 2: Requirements 

for Water Fittings, of the Water Supply 

(Water Fittings) Regulations 1999, 

SI 1999/1148;

c.  door handles and other ironmongery 

comply with provisions 3.10 (d) and (e) 

of Internal doors;

d.  WC compartment doors, and doors 

to wheelchairaccessible unisex toilets, 

changing rooms or shower rooms are 

fitted with light action privacy bolts so 

that they can be operated by people 

with limited dexterity and, if required to 

selfclose, can be opened using a force 

at the leading edge of not more than 

30N from 0 (the door in the closed 

position) to 30 open, and not more 

than 22.5N from 30 to 60 of the 

opening cycle;

e.  WC compartment doors, and doors 

to wheelchairaccessible unisex toilets, 

changing rooms or shower rooms have 

an emergency release mechanism so 

that they are capable of being opened 

outwards, from the outside, in case of 

emergency;

f.  doors, when open, do not obstruct 

emergency escape routes;

g.  any fire alarm emits a visual and audible 

signal to warn occupants with hearing 

or visual impairments;

h.  any emergency assistance alarm 

system has:

i.  visual and audible indicators to 

confirm that an emergency call has 

been received;

ii.


Provisions

5.7  The provision of toilet accommodation 

will satisfy Requirement M1or M3 if:

a.  where there is space for only one toilet 

in a building, it is of a wheelchair

accessible unisex type, but of greater 

width to accommodate a standing 

height wash basin;

b.  at least one wheelchairaccessible 

unisex toilet is provided at each location 

in a building where sanitary facilities 

are provided for use by customers and 

visitors to a building, or by people 

working in the building;

c.  at least one WC cubicle is provided in 

separatesex toilet accommodation for 

use by ambulant disabled people;

d.  where there are four or more WC 

cubicles in separatesex toilet 

accommodation, one of these is an 

enlarged cubicle for use by people 

who need extra space, in addition to 

any provision under 5.7(c);

e.  at least one changing places toilet is 

provided in the following types of 

building:

i.  assembly, recreation and 

entertainment buildings (see note) 

with a capacity for 350 or more 

people; or a collection of smaller 

buildings associated with a site used 

for assembly, recreation or 

entertainment, such as zoos, theme 

parks and venues for sport and 

exhibitions, with a capacity of 2000 

people or more; 

ii.


sport and leisure buildings with a 

gross floor area more than 5000m2;

v.  hospitals and primary care centres;

vi.


Capacities should be 

derived from the combined total of a 

buildings publicly accessible facilities.


Wheelchairaccessible 

unisex toilets

Design considerations

5.8  Wheelchair users should be able to 

approach, transfer to and use the sanitary 

facilities provided within a building.


Consideration should be given 

to installing a chemical sanitary waste 

disposal unit in wheelchairaccessible WC 

accommodation.


Provisions

5.10  Wheelchairaccessible unisex toilets 

will satisfy Requirement M1 or M3 if:

a.  one is located as close as possible to 

the entrance and/or waiting area of 

the building;

b.  they are not located in a way that 

compromises the privacy of users;

c.  they are located in a similar position 

on each floor of a multistorey building, 

and allow for right and lefthand 

transfer on alternate floors;

d.  when more than one unisex toilet is 

available in other than multistorey 

buildings, a choice of layouts suitable 

for lefthand and righthand transfer 

is provided;

e.  when it is the only toilet facility in the 

building, the width is increased from 

1.5m to 2m and it includes a standing 

height washbasin, in addition to the 

finger rinse basin associated with the WC;

f.  they are located on accessible routes 

that are direct and obstruction free;

g.  doors are preferably outward opening 

and are fitted with a horizontal closing 

bar fixed to the inside face;

h.  any wheelchair user does not have 

to travel:

i.  more than 40m on the same floor, 

unless a greater distance can be agreed  

with the building control body on the 

grounds that the circulation route is 

unobstructed, e.g.


more than a 40m combined 

horizontal distance where the unisex 

toilet accommodation is on another 

floor of the building, but is accessible 

by passenger lift (if a lifting platform 

is installed, vertical travel to a unisex 

toilet is limited to one storey);

the minimum overall dimensions of, 

and the arrangement of fittings within, 

a wheelchairaccessible unisex toilet 

comply with Diagram 18;

j.  where the horizontal support rail on the 

wall adjacent to the WC is set with the 

minimum spacing from the wall, an 

additional dropdown rail is provided 

on the wall side at a distance of 320mm 

from the centre line of the WC;

k.  where the horizontal support rail on the 

wall adjacent to the WC is set so that its 

centre line is 400mm from the centre 

line of the WC, there is no additional 

dropdown rail;

the heights and arrangement of fittings 

in a wheelchairaccessible unisex toilet 

comply with Diagram 19 and, as 

appropriate, Diagram 20;

m. an emergency assistance alarm system 

is provided, complying with 5.4;

n.  the emergency assistance call signal 

outside the toilet compartment is 

located so that it can be easily seen and 

heard by those able to give assistance;

o.  an emergency assistance pull cord 

is easily identifiable (see 4.30(e)) and 

reachable from the WC and from the 

floor close to the WC;

p.  any heat emitters are located so that 

they do not restrict the minimum clear 

wheelchair manoeuvring space, nor the 

space beside the WC used for transfer 

from the wheelchair to the WC;

q.  WC pans conform to BS EN 997:2012 

in terms of key dimensions in order to 

accommodate the use of a variable 

height toilet seat riser (see 5.9);

r.  cisterns for WCs that will be used by 

wheelchair users have their flushing 

mechanism positioned on the open or 

transfer side of the space, irrespective 

of handing.


The compartment should be 

fitted with support rails, and include a 

minimum activity space to accommodate 

people who use crutches, or otherwise have 

impaired leg movements.


Consideration should be given to installing 

a folddown table, e.g.


5.13  Where a separatesex toilet washroom 

can be accessed by wheelchair users, it 

should be possible for them to use both a 

urinal, where appropriate, and a washbasin 

at a lower height than is provided for other 

users.


In general, the findings indicate that there 

should be at least the same number of 

WCs (for women) as urinals (for men) and 

for some building types, e.g.


large retail 

buildings, at least twice as many.


Consideration 

should be given to providing a low level 

urinal for children in male washrooms.


Provisions

5.14  WC compartments within separatesex 

toilet washrooms will satisfy Requirement 

M1 or M3 if:

a.  the swing of any inward opening doors 

to standard WC compartments is such 

that a 450mm diameter manoeuvring 

space is maintained between the swing 

of the door, the WC pan and the side 

wall of the compartment;

b.  the minimum dimensions of compartments 

for ambulant disabled people, including 

the activity space, and the arrangement 

of grab bars and other fittings within the 

compartment, comply with Diagram 21;

Access to and use of buildings other than dwellings Approved Document M Volume 2 

SANITARY ACCOMMODATION IN BUILDINGS

OTHER THAN DWELLINGS 

M1/M3

Diagram 21    WC cubicle for ambulant 

disabled people

c.  doors to compartments for ambulant 

disabled people are preferably outward 

opening and are fitted with a horizontal 

closing bar fixed to the inside face;

d.  an enlarged compartment for those 

who need extra space (based on the 

compartment for ambulant disabled 

people) is 1200mm wide and includes 

a horizontal grab bar adjacent to the 

WC, a vertical grab bar on the rear wall 

and space for a shelf and folddown 

changing table;

e.  any compartment for use by ambulant 

disabled people has a WC pan that 

conforms to BS EN 997:2012 in terms 

of key dimensions, in order to 

accommodate the use of a variable 

height toilet seat riser (see 5.9 and 5.11);

f.  a wheelchairaccessible compartment 

(where provided) has the same layout 

and fittings as the unisex toilet;

g.  any wheelchairaccessible washroom 

has at least one washbasin with its rim 

set at 720 to 740mm above the floor 

and, for men, at least one urinal with its 

rim set at 380mm above the floor, with 

two 600mm long vertical grab bars with 

their centre lines at 1100mm above the 

floor, positioned either side of the urinal.


Any combined facility 

should be divided into distinct wet and 

dry areas.


in clothes shops, the dimensions and 

fittings recommended for an individual 

selfcontained changing cubicle in a sports 

building should be provided.


In large 

building complexes, such as retail parks and 

large sports centres, there should be one 

wheelchairaccessible unisex toilet capable 

of including an adult changing table.


Provisions

5.18  Wheelchairaccessible changing and 

shower facilities will satisfy Requirement 

M1 or M3 if:

For changing and shower facilities

a.  a choice of layouts suitable for lefthand 

and righthand transfer is provided when 

more than one individual changing 

compartment or shower compartment 

is available;

b.  they are provided with wallmounted 

dropdown support rails and wall

mounted slipresistant tipup seats 

(not spring loaded);

c.  in communal shower facilities and 

changing facilities, they are provided 

with subdivisions that have the same 

configuration of space and equipment 

as for selfcontained facilities but 

without doors;

d.  in sports facilities, individual self

contained shower facilities and changing 

facilities are available in addition to 

communal separatesex facilities;

e.  an emergency assistance pull cord, 

complying with 4.30(e), is easily 

identifiable and reachable from the 

wallmounted tipup seat, or from the 

floor;

f.  an emergency assistance alarm system 

complying with 5.4(h) is provided;

g.  facilities for limb storage are included 

for the benefit of amputees;

For changing facilities

h.  the minimum overall dimensions of, 

and the arrangement of equipment and 

controls within, individual selfcontained 

changing facilities comply with Diagram 22;

i.  when associated with shower facilities, 

the floor of a changing area is level and 

slip resistant when dry or when wet;

there is a manoeuvring space 1500mm 

deep in front of lockers in selfcontained 

or communal changing areas;

For shower facilities

k.  individual selfcontained shower 

facilities comply with Diagram 23;

l.  where showers are provided in 

commercial developments for the 

benefit of staff, at least one wheelchair

accessible shower compartment 

complying with Diagram 23 should 

be provided;

m. a shower curtain, which encloses the 

seat and the rails when they are in a 

horizontal position, can be operated 

from the shower seat;

n.  a shelf that can be reached from the 

shower seat or from the wheelchair, 

before or after transfer, is provided 

for toiletries;

o.  the floor of the shower and shower area 

is slip resistant and selfdraining;

p.  a shower terminal fitting complies with 

Guidance Note G18.5 of the Guidance 

Document relating to Schedule 2: 

Requirement for Water Fittings, of the 

Water Supply (Water Fittings) Regulations 

1999, SI 1999/1148, and the markings on 

the shower control are logical and clear;

q.  where wheelchairaccessible shower 

facilities are available in communal 

areas, shower controls are positioned 

between 750 and 1000mm above 

the floor;

For shower facilities incorporating a WC

r.  the minimum overall dimensions of, and 

the arrangement of fittings within, an 

individual selfcontained shower area 

incorporating a corner WC, e.g.


Access to and use of buildings other than dwellings Approved Document M Volume 2 

SANITARY ACCOMMODATION IN BUILDINGS

OTHER THAN DWELLINGS 

M1/M3

Diagram 22   An example of a selfcontained changing room for individual use

Wheelchairaccessible bathrooms

Design considerations

5.19  Wheelchair users and ambulant 

disabled people should be able to wash or 

bathe either independently or with assistance 

from others.


Approved Document M Volume 2 Access to and use of buildings other than dwellingsSANITARY ACCOMMODATION IN BUILDINGS

M1/M3  OTHER THAN DWELLINGS

Diagram 23   An example of a selfcontained shower room for individual use

Provisions

5.21  Wheelchairaccessible bathrooms 

will satisfy Requirement M1 or M3 if:

a.  the minimum overall dimensions of, 

and the arrangement of fittings within, a 

bathroom for individual use incorporating 

a corner WC comply with Diagrams 25 

and 26;

c.  the floor of a bathroom is slip resistant 

when dry or when wet;

d.  the bath is provided with a transfer seat, 

400mm deep and equal to the width of 

the bath;

e.  doors are preferably outward opening 

and are fitted with a horizontal closing 

bar fixed to the inside face;

b.  a choice of layouts suitable for lefthand 

and righthand transfer is provided when 

more than one bathroom for individual 

use incorporating a corner WC is available;

f.  an emergency assistance pullcord 

complying with 4.30(e) is easily 

identifiable and reachable from the 

bath or from the floor;

Access to and use of buildings other than dwellings Approved Document M Volume 2 

SANITARY ACCOMMODATION IN BUILDINGS

OTHER THAN DWELLINGS 

M1/M3

Diagram 24   An example of a shower room incorporating a corner WC for individual use

g.  an emergency assistance alarm system 

complying with 5.4(h) is provided.


