Regulation 4 states that building work should be carried out in such a way that, when work is 

complete:

a.  for new buildings or work on a building that complied with the applicable requirements of the 

Building Regulations: the building complies with the applicable requirements of the Building 

Regulations;

b.  for work on an existing building that did not comply with the applicable requirements of the 

Building Regulations:

(ii) the work itself must comply with the applicable requirements of the Building Regulations

the building must be no more unsatisfactory in relation to the requirements than before 

the work was carried out.


The Building Regulations set out requirements that must be met before a building can be used for a 

new purpose.


Materials and workmanship.

In accordance with regulation 7, building work must be carried out in a workmanlike manner using 

adequate and proper materials.



Notification of work.

Most building work and material changes of use must be notified to a building control body unless 

one of the following applies.


People who are responsible for building work (e.g. agent, designer, builder or installer) must ensure
that the work complies with all applicable requirements of the Building Regulations.


0.3  Requirement K1 applies to means of access outside a building only when the access is part of the 

building (i.e. attached).


Where access and circulation routes form part of a means of escape for people in case of

fire, refer to Approved Document B: Fire safety, Volume 1  Dwelling-houses, and Volume 2 

Buildings other than dwelling-houses.


this may be the case the Construction (Design and Management) Regulations 2007 provides detail 

on procedures for safe use of temporary means of access, together with focus on effective planning 

and management of risk.


Where applicable the following cross-referencing should be made.


Stairs, ladders and ramps shall be so designed, 

constructed and installed as to be safe for people 

moving between different levels in or about the 

building.

Note: Two examples of tread proles have been shown together for illustrative purposes only.

Stairs and ladders K1.

 In a flight of steps, for all steps use the measurements for rise and going given for the three stair 

categories in Table 1.1 below.


2   For dwellings, for external tapered steps and stairs that are part of the building the going of each step should be 

a minimum of 280mm.


The normal relationship between the dimensions of the rise and going is: twice the rise plus the going (2R  G) 

equals between 550mm and 700mm.


For existing buildings the dimensional requirements in Table 1.1 should be followed, unless due to dimensional 

constraints it is not possible.


Any alternative proposal should be agreed with the relevant building control body and 

included in an access strategy (refer to Approved Document M).


Stepped gangways in assembly buildings.

1.4  The guidance provided in this document covers stairs or ramps that form part of the means of access 

within an assembly building such as a sports stadium, theatre or cinema.


In stepped tiers, use the following measurements for each step in the gangway:

(i)  minimum height: 100mm

(ii)  maximum height: 190mm

If there are two or more rises to each row of seats, make each step an equal height.


In a tier that is uninterrupted by crossgangways, and where the pitch exceeds 25, use a 

maximum number of steps of 40.


j.  Gangways should not be less than 1100mm wide unless used by not more than 50 persons, in 

which case gangways should be a minimum of 900mm.


If the nosing protrudes, 

ensure that this is by no more than 25mm (see Diagram 1.2).


If the soffit beneath a stair is less than 2m above floor level, protect the area beneath a stair with 

one of the following.

For buildings other than dwellings and for common access areas in buildings that contain flats

1.12   Provide all means of escape routes with a minimum clear headroom of 2m, except in doorways.


Width of flights of stairs.

For buildings other than dwellings.

1.14  For stairs that form part of means of escape, refer also to Approved Document B: Fire safety,  

Volume 2  Buildings other than dwellinghouses.


If the flight is more than 2m wide, divide it into flights a minimum of 1000mm wide, as shown in 

Diagram 1.5.

d.  For access for maintenance, see paragraph 1.42.


Stairs and ladders K1.

Length of flights of stairs.

For all buildings.

1.17   If stairs have more than 36 risers in consecutive flights, make a minimum of one change of direction 

between flights, as shown in Diagram 1.6.


For flights between landings the maximum number of risers should be:

(i) utility stairs - 16 risers;

(ii) general access stairs  12 risers, but exceptionally no more than 16 in small premises where

the plan area is restricted;

(iii) stairs for access for maintenance, see paragraph 1.42.


Landings for stairs.

For all buildings.

1.19   For means of escape requirements, refer also to Approved Document B: Volume 1  Dwellinghouses, 

and Volume 2  Buildings other than dwellinghouses.


1.20   At the top and bottom of every flight, provide landings the width and length at least as great as the 

smallest width of the flight (see Diagram 1.6).


1.21   A landing: 

a. may include part of the floor of the building;

b. should be kept clear of permanent obstructions

c. may have doors to cupboards and ducts that open over a landing at the top of a flight, as

shown in Diagram 1.7, but only when they are kept shut or locked shut when under normal use.

Cupboard onto landing

1.22  Landings should be level, with the following exception.


1.27  If a stair consists of straight and tapered treads, ensure that the going of the tapered treads is not 

less than the going of the straight treads.

Spiral and helical stairs.

1.28  Design spiral stairs and helical stairs in accordance with BS 53952.


Alternating tread stairs in dwellings.

1.29  You may use alternating tread stairs  in one or more straight flights  only in a loft conversion, and 

only when there is not enough space for a stair that satisfies paragraphs 1.21.24, and the stair is for 

access to only one habitable room and, if desired, a bathroom and/or a WC (although this must not 

be the only WC in the dwelling).

1.31  Do not use retractable ladders as means of escape.


Where there is fullheight structural guarding, if you provide a second (lower) handrail, the 

vertical height from the pitch line of the steps (or the surface of the ramp) to the top of the 

second (lower) handrail should be 600mm.


In dwellings.

1.41  Provide guarding at the sides of flights and landings when there is a drop of more than 600mm.


The Construction (Design and Management) Regulations 2007 give 

provisions for safe use of temporary means of access.


NOTE: A floor level with a gradient of 1:20 or steeper should be designed as a ramp.

Ramps K1.

Construction of ramps.

For buildings other than dwellings.

2.4   A ramps surface should be selected in accordance with both of the following:
a. Use a ramp surface that is slip resistant, especially when wet, and a colour that will contrast
visually with that of the landings.
b. Ensure that the frictional characteristics of the ramp and landing surfaces are similar.

2.6 Where the change of level is:
a. 300mm or more: in addition to the ramp, provide two or more clearly signposted steps;

b.  less than 300mm: provide a ramp instead of a single step.


2.7   If the soffit beneath any ramp is less than 2m above floor level, protect the area beneath the ramp 

with one of the following.


Landing.

Length of landings to be at least equal to the width of the ramp.

Ramp design.

Ramps.


Width of ramps.

For buildings other than dwellings.

2.9  Regarding the width of a ramp.


For a ramp that forms a means of escape, refer also to Approved Document B: Volume 2  

Buildings other than dwellinghouses, B1, Section 5.


For ramps that are less than 1000mm wide: provide a handrail on one or both sides.


any light well, basement area or similar sunken 

(b) any light well, basement area or similar sunken 

area connected to a building, 

shall be provided with barriers where it is necessary to 

protect people in or about the building from falling.


Unless otherwise set out elsewhere in this document for particular situations, you can 

achieve this by the following:

a. in dwellings: provide pedestrian guarding that is capable of preventing people from being injured 

by falling from a height of more than 600mm

b.  in buildings other than dwellings: provide pedestrian guarding that is capable of preventing 

people from falling more than the height of two risers (or 380mm, if not part of a stair).


Design of guarding.

For all buildings.

3.2  Guarding should be provided in accordance with all of the following.

Protection from falling.



Building Category and location.
Barrier siting.

4.2  Barriers should be provided in accordance with all of the following.
Loading bays

For all buildings

4.3  Loading bays should be constructed with exit points in accordance with both of the following.


Guarding for loading bays.

For all buildings.

4.4  Where there is a danger of people falling, loading bays should be provided with guarding as per 

the guidance provided in this approved document.


If guarding is not practical for the particular 

circumstances, alternative safeguards should be provided and agreed with the building control 

body.


Requirements.

Requirement.

Limits on application.

Protection against impact with glazing.

K4.Glazing, with which people are likely to come into 

contact whilst moving in or about the building shall:

 if broken on impact, break in a way which is unlikely 

to cause injury; or

(b)  resist impact without breaking; or

(c)  be shielded or protected from impact.


It is installed in a door or in a door side panel and has a pane width exceeding 900mm and it 

satisfies the requirements of Class 2 of BS EN 12600 or Class B of BS 6206.


5.7  Small panes should be provided in accordance with all of the following.

Protection against impact with glazing.



Permanent screen protection.

5.8  If glazing in a critical location is protected by a permanent screen then the glazing itself does not 

need to comply with requirement K4.


K5.1 Provision shall be made to prevent people moving 

in or about the building from colliding with open 

windows, skylights or ventilators.

Protection from collision with open windows etc.


Requirements.

Requirement.

Manifestation of glazing.

K5.2 Transparent glazing, with which people are 

likely to come into contact while moving in or about 

the building, shall incorporate features which make it 

apparent.


Performance.

In the Secretary of States view, you can meet requirement K5.2 by including, in critical locations, 

permanent means of indicating the presence of large uninterrupted areas of transparent glazing.


To avoid this one of the following should be adopted.


K5.3 Windows, skylights and ventilators which can 

be opened by people in or about the building shall be 

so constructed or equipped that they may be opened, 

closed or adjusted safely.


If controls cannot be positioned as shown in Diagram 8.1 within safe reach of a permanent 

stable surface, provide a safe manual or electrical means of remote operation.


K5.4 Provision shall be made for any windows, 

skylights, or any transparent or translucent walls, ceilings 

or roofs to be safely accessible for cleaning.


Performance.

In the Secretary of States view, you can meet requirement K5.4 if, where a person may fall from a 

window, you provide safe means of access for cleaning both sides of the glass.


Special safety features are not necessary

if the ladder is not more than 6m long.


e.  Provide walkways at least 400mm wide, either with guarding at least 1100mm high, or with 

anchorages for sliding safety harnesses (see Diagram 9.3).


(1)  Provision shall be made to prevent any door or 

gate:

(a)  which slides or opens upwards, from falling 

onto any person; and

(b) which is powered, from trapping any person.


(2)  Provision shall be made for powered doors and gates 

to be opened in the event of a power failure.


(3)  Provision shall be made to ensure a clear view of the 

space on either side of a swing door or gate.


Protection against impact from and trapping by doors

Section 10: Protection against impact from and 

trapping by doors.

Safety features.

10.1  Doors and gates should be constructed in accordance with all of the following.


For sliding doors and gates, provide both of the following: 

a stop or other effective means to prevent them coming off the end of the track

(ii)  a retaining rail to prevent doors and gates falling if the suspension system fails or the rollers 

leave the track.

Hazards on access routes.

10.2  If, during normal use, doors (excluding fire escape doors) swing out by more than 100mm towards 

an access route, protect them as shown in Diagram 10.2.


Common stair: Serving more than one dwelling.


Ladder: A means of access to another level, formed 

by a series of rungs or narrow treads.


