Reasonable provision shall be made in the design and installation of electrical installations in order to protect persons operating, maintaining or altering the  installations from fire or injury.
Design and installation P1.
Section 1: Design and installation.
General.
1.1  Electrical installations should be designed and installed in accordance with BS 7671:2008 incorporating Amendment No 1:2011.
Provision of information.
1.2  Sufficient information should be provided to ensure that people can operate, maintain or alter an electrical installation with reasonable safety.
New dwellings.
1.4  Wall-mounted socket-outlets, switches and consumer units in new dwellings should be easy to reach, in accordance with Part M of the Building Regulations (Access to and use of buildings).
NOTE: Approved Document M recommends that in new dwellings only, switches and socketoutlets for lighting and other equipment should be between 450mm and 1200mm from finished floor level.
This means that in some cases the existing electrical installation will need to be upgraded to meet current standards.
Additions and alterations to existing electrical installations.
1.6  Regulation 4(3) states that when building work is complete, the building should be no more unsatisfactory in terms of complying with the applicable parts of Schedule 1 to the Building Regulations than before the building work was started.
Therefore, when extending or altering an electrical installation, only the new work must meet current standards.
1.7 Any new work should be carried out in accordance with BS 7671.
The existing electrical installation should be checked to ensure that the following conditions are all satisfied.
Section 2 sets out:a.  the types of building and electrical installation that are within the scope of Part Pb.  the types of electrical work that are notifiable and must be certified as complying with the Building Regulations.
However, conservatories, porches, domestic greenhouses, garages and sheds that share their electricity with a dwelling are not exempt from Part P (by virtue of regulation 9(3)) and must comply with its requirements.
(9) In this regulation special location meanswithin a room containing a bath or shower, the space surrounding a bath tap (a) within a room containing a bath or shower, the space surrounding a bath tap or shower head, where the space extends(i) vertically from the finished floor level tovertically from the finished floor level toa height of 2.25 metres; or(aa) a height of 2.25 metres; orthe position of the shower head where it is attached to a wall or (bb) the position of the shower head where it is attached to a wall or ceiling at a point higher than 2.25 metres from that level; andceiling at a point higher than 2.25 metres from that level; and(ii) horizontallywhere there is a bath tub or shower tray, from the edge of the bath (aa) where there is a bath tub or shower tray, from the edge of the bath tub or shower tray to a distance of 0.6 metres; or(bb) where there is no bath tub or shower tray, from the centre point of the shower head where it is attached to the wall or ceiling to a distance of 1.2 metres; ora room containing a swimming pool or sauna heater.
Section 3: Certification, inspection and testing.
General.
3.1 For notifiable electrical installation work, one of the following three procedures must be used to certify that the work complies with the requirements set out in the Building Regulations.
3.2 To verify that the design and installation of electrical work is adequate, and that installations will be safe to use, maintain and alter, the electrical work should be inspected and tested in accordance with the procedures in BS 7671.
NOTE: Electrical inspection and test forms should be given to the person ordering the work.
3.4 The installer or the installers registration body must within 30 days of the work being completed do both of the following.
3.6 Within 5 days of completing the work, the installer must notify the registered thirdparty certifier who, subject to the results of the inspection and testing being satisfactory, should then complete an electrical installation condition report and give it to the person ordering the work.
NOTE: The electrical installation condition report should be the model BS 7671 form or one developed specifically for Part P purposes.
3.7 The registration body of the thirdparty certifier must within 30 days of a satisfactory condition report being issued do both of the following.
Certification by a building control body.
If an installer is not a registered competent person and has not appointed a registered thirdparty certifier, then before work begins the installer must notify a building control body.
Inspection and testing of non-notifiable work.
3.13  Nonnotifiable electrical installation work, like notifiable work, should be designed and installed, and inspected, tested and certificated in accordance with BS 7671.
The following are key terms used in this document.
Low voltage: A voltage exceeding extra-low voltage but not exceeding 1000V ac or 1500V dc between conductors, or 600V ac or 900V dc between conductors and earth.
Registered competent person: A competent person registered with a Part P competent person self-certification scheme.
Electrical installation: Fixed electric cables or fixed electrical equipment located on the consumers side of the electricity supply meter.
Registered third-party certifier: A competent person registered with a Part P competent person third-party certification scheme.
