(1)  The building shall be constructed so that the combined dead, imposed  and  wind  loads  are  sustained  and  transmitted  by  it  to  the ground:(a)  safely; and(b)  without  causing  such  deflection  or  deformation  of  any part of the building, or such movement of the ground, as will impair the stability of any part of another building.
(2)  In assessing whether a building complies with subparagraph (1) regard shall be had to the imposed and wind loads to which it is likely to be subjected in the ordinary course of its use for the purpose for which it is intended.
The  building  shall  be  constructed  so  that  ground  movement caused by:(a)  swelling, shrinkage or freezing of the subsoil; or(b)  landslip  or  subsidence  (other  than  subsidence  arising  from  shrinkage),  in  so  far  as  the  risk  can  be  reasonably  foreseen,  will not impair the stability of any part of the building.
The design should be based on identification of the hazards to which the structure is likely to be subjected and assessment of the risks.
The selection of relevant critical situations for design should be made reflecting the conditions that can reasonably be foreseen during future use.
Dead load, imposed load and wind load should be in accordance with the current Codes of practice referred to in Section 1 of this document.
The numeric values of safety factors, whether expressed explicitly or implicitly in design equations, or design values, should be derived from considerations of the above aspects of design and construction as a whole.
Such conditions should be taken into account in the design of the building and its foundations.
The Institution of Structural Engineers Technical Publication Appraisal of Existing Structures (third edition), 2010Note: With reference to design checks in the referenced Institution of Structural Engineers Technical Publication the choice of various partial factors should be made to suit the individual circumstances of each case.
Section 2C Thickness of masonry walls in certain residential buildings of not more than three storeys, small singlestorey nonresidential buildings and annexes.
Section 2A gives general rules which must be observed in following Sections 2B and 2C.
Structure Approved Document ASection 2A: Basic requirements for stability2A1  This section must be used in conjunction with sections 2B and 2C and its principles relate to all forms of lowrise residential buildings.
2A2  Adequate provision shall be made to ensure that the building is stable under the likely imposed and wind loading conditions.
However, the need for diagonal rafter bracing equivalent to that recommended in BS EN 199511:2004 with its UK National Annex and additional guidance given in BSI Published Document PD 66931:2012 and BS 81033:2009 for trussed rafter roofs should be considered, especially for singlehipped and nonhipped roofs of greater than 40 pitch to detached houses.
In the geographical areas specified in House longhorn beetleTable 1, softwood timber for roof construction or fixed in the roof space, including ceiling joists within the void spaces of the roof, should be adequately treated to prevent infestation by the house longhorn beetle (Hylotrupes bajulus L.).
Section 2C: Thickness of walls in certain small buildings.
Application.
2C1  This section applies to the following building types:a.  residential buildings of not more than three storeys;b.  small singlestorey nonresidential buildings;c.  small buildings forming annexes to residential buildings (including garages and outbuildings).
Wall types.
2C2  Only the types of wall given in Table 2, which must extend to the full storey height, and parapet walls are considered in this section.
The use of this section2C3  When using this section it should be noted that:a.  this section must be used in conjunction with section 2A;b.  if wall thickness is to be determined according to paragraphs 2C5 to 2C13, all appropriate design conditions given in this section must be satisfied;c.  walls should comply with the relevant requirements of BS EN 19962:2006 with its UK National Annex and additional guidance given in BSI Published Document PD 6697:2010, except as regards the conditions given in paragraphs 2C4 and 2C14 to 2C38;d.  in formulating the guidance of this section the worst combination of circumstances likely to arise was taken into account.
If a requirement of this part is considered too onerous in a particular case it may be appropriate to consider a minor departure on the basis of judgement and experience, or to show adequacy by calculation in respect of the aspect of the wall which is subject to the departure rather than for the entire wall;e.  the guidance given is based upon the compressive strengths of bricks and blocks being not less than indicated in Tables 6 and 7.
Conditions relating to the building of which the wall forms part2C4  This section applies only to buildings having proportions within the following parameters (see Diagrams 1 and 2):a.  residential buildings of not more than three storeys:the maximum height of the building measured from the lowest finished ground level adjoining the building to the highest point of any wall or roof should not be greater than 15m, subject to the limits of paragraph 2C16.
the height of the building H should not exceed twice the least width of the building W1.
the height of the wing H2 should not exceed twice the least width of the wing W2 where the projection P exceeds twice the width W2.
b.  small singlestorey non-residential buildings: height H should not exceed 3m and W (being the greatest length or width of the building) should not exceed 9m (see Diagram 2), subject to the limits of paragraph 2C16.
c.  annexes: height H as variously indicated in Diagram 2 should not exceed 3m, subject to the limits of paragraph 2C16.
Table 2  Wall types considered in this section.
A1/2  THICKNESS OF WALLS IN CERTAIN SMALL BUILDINGS.
Diagram 1   Size and proportion of residential buildings of not more than three storeysSee para 2C4.
Thickness of walls.
2C5  General wall thickness may be determined according to this section provided:a.  conditions relating to the building of which the wall forms part (see paragraphs 2C4, 2C14 to 2C16, 2C38); andb.  conditions relating to the wall (see paragraphs 2C17 to 2C37) are met.
2C6  Solid external walls, compartment walls and separating walls in coursed brickwork or blockwork: Solid walls constructed of coursed brickwork or blockwork should be at least as thick as 1/16 of the storey height.
The thickness of walls constructed in uncoursed stone, flints, clunches, bricks or other burnt or vitrified material should not be less than 1.33 times the thickness determined by paragraph 2C6.
2C8  Cavity walls in coursed brickwork or blockwork: All cavity walls should have leaves at least 90mm thick and cavities at least 50mm wide.
The wall ties should have a horizontal spacing of 900mm and a vertical spacing of 450mm, or alternatively should be spaced such that the number of wall ties per square metre is not less than 2.5 ties/m2.
Wall ties should also be provided, spaced not more than 300mm apart vertically, within a distance of 225mm from the vertical edges of all openings, movement joints and roof verges.
For external walls, compartment walls and separating walls in cavity construction, the combined thickness of the two leaves plus 10mm should not be less than the thickness determined by paragraph 2C6 and Table 3 for a solid wall of the same height and length.
2C10  Internal loadbearing walls in brickwork or blockwork (except compartment walls or separating walls): All internal loadbearing walls should have a thickness not less than:   (specified thickness from Table 3)  5mm.
THICKNESS OF WALLS IN CERTAIN SMALL BUILDINGS.
2C14  Maximum floor area: The guidance of this section assumes that no floor enclosed by structural walls on all sides exceeds 70m2, and that no floor without a structural wall on one side exceeds 36m2.
2C11  Parapet walls: The minimum thickness and maximum height of parapet walls should be as given in Diagram 4.
2C13  Modular bricks and blocks: Where walls are constructed of bricks or blocks having modular dimensions, wall thicknesses prescribed in this section which derive from a dimension of brick or block may be reduced by an amount not exceeding the deviation from work size permitted by a British Standard relating to equivalent sized bricks or blocks made of the same material.
Conditions relating to the wall2C17  Maximum allowable length and height of the wall: This section does not deal with walls longer than 12m, measured from centre to centre of buttressing walls, piers or chimneys providing restraint, or with walls exceeding 12m in height (see also Table 3).
Wall ties should be selected in accordance with Table 5 of this Approved Document.
2C20  Masonry units: Walls should be properly bonded and solidly put together with mortar and constructed of masonry units conforming to:a.  clay bricks or blocks to BS EN 7711;b.  calcium silicate bricks or blocks to BS EN 7712;BS EN 7714;d.  manufactured stone to BS EN 7715;e.  square dressed natural stone to the appropriate requirements described in  BS EN 7716.
2C21  Compressive strength of masonry units: Minimum compressive strength requirements for masonry units according to BS EN Standards are given in Diagram 9, where the masonry units indicated for Conditions A, B and C should have declared compressive strengths of not less than the values given in Table 6.
Table b   For elevated sites where orography is significant a more accurate assessment of Factor A can be  obtained by using the altitude at the base of the topographic feature instead of the altitude at the site, Table c  see Figure 2 Diagram 6 or, alternatively, Figure 3 Diagram 6.i)  Sites in town less than 300m from the edge of the town should be assumed to be in country terrain.
ii) Where a site is closer than 1km to an inland area of water which extends more than 1km in the wind  direction, the distance to the coast should be taken as  2km.
Where face insulated blocks are used the cavity width should be measured from the face of the masonry unit.
The embedment depth of the tie should not be less than 50mm in both leaves.
Brick: a masonry unit having work sizes not exceeding 337.5mm in length or 112.5mm in height.
Block: a masonry unit exceeding either of the limiting work sizes of a brick and with a minimum height of 190mm.
For blocks with smaller heights, excluding cuts or make up units, the strength requirements are as for brick except for solid external walls where the blocks should have a compressive strength at least equal to that shown for block for an inner leaf of a cavity wall in the same position.
Group 1 masonry units have not more than 25 formed voids (20 for frogged bricks).
Group 2 masonry units have formed voids greater than 25, but not more than 55.
Compressive strengths of masonry units should be derived according to EN 7721.
The table applies to clay and calcium silicate block masonry units where the work size exceeds 337.5mm in length or 112.5mm in height.
Group 1 masonry units have not more than 25 formed voids (20 for frogged bricks).
Group 2 masonry units have formed voids greater than 25, but not more than 55.
2C22  Mortar: Mortar should be:a. one of the following:i.  Mortar designation (iii) according to  BS EN 199611:2005 with its UK  National Annex;ii.Strength class M4 according to BS EN 998-2:2010;iii.
1:1:5 to 6 CEM I, lime, and the fine aggregate measured by volume of dry materials, orb. of equivalent or greather strength and durability to the speciafications of a. above.
2C24  Other loading conditions.
a.  Vertical loading on walls should be distributed.
Differences in level of ground or other solid construction between one side of the wall and the other should be less than 4 times the thickness of the wall as shown in Diagram 11. c.  The combined dead and imposed load should not exceed 70kN/m at base of wall (see Diagram 11).
2C25  Vertical lateral restraint to wallsThe ends of every wall should be bonded or otherwise securely tied throughout their full height to a buttressing wall, pier or chimney.
2C26  Buttressing wallsIf the buttressing wall is not itself a supported wall its thickness T2 should not be less than:a.  half the thickness required by this section for an external or separating wall of similar height and length less 5mm; orb.
75mm if the wall forms part of a dwelling house and does not exceed 6m in total height and 10m in length; andc.  90mm in other cases.
The length of the buttressing wall should be at least 1/6 of the overall height of the supported wall and be bonded or securely tied to the supporting wall and at the other end to a buttressing wall, pier or chimney.
The size of any opening in the buttressing wall should be restricted as shown in Diagram 12.
2C27  Design criteria for piers and chimneys providing restraint:a.  piers should measure at least 3 times the thickness of the supported wall and chimneys twice the thickness, measured at right angles to the wall.
Piers should have a minimum width of 190mm (see Diagram 13);b.  the sectional area on plan of chimneys (excluding openings for fireplaces and flues) should be not less than the area required for a pier in the same wall, and the overall thickness should not be less than twice the required thickness of the supported wall (see Diagram 13).
Construction over openings and recesses should be adequately supported.
No openings should be provided in walls below ground floor except for small holes for services and ventilation, etc.
which should be limited to a maximum area of 0.1m at not less than 2m centres.
2C35  Walls should be strapped to floors above ground level, at intervals not exceeding 2m and as shown in Diagram 15, by tension straps conforming to BS EN 8451.
Tension straps need not be provided: a.  in the longitudinal direction of joists in houses of not more than 2 storeys, if the joists are at not more than 1.2m centres and have at least 90mm bearing on the supported walls or 75mm bearing on a timber wallplate at each end, and b.  in the longitudinal direction of joists in houses of not more than 2 storeys, if the joists are carried on the supported wall by joist hangers in accordance with BS EN 8451 of the restraint type described by additional guidance given in BSI Published Document PD 6697:2010 and shown in Diagram 15(c), and are incorporated at not more than 2m centres, andc.  when a concrete floor has at least 90mm bearing on the supported wall (see Diagram 15(d)), andd.  where floors are at or about the same level on each side of a supported wall, and contact between the floors and wall is either continuous or at intervals not exceeding 2m.
Where contact is intermittent, the points of contact should be in line or nearly in line on plan (see Diagram 15(e)).
2C36  Gable walls should be strapped to roofs as shown in Diagram 16(a) and (b) by tension straps as described in 2C35.
Vertical strapping at least 1m in length should be provided at eaves level at intervals not exceeding 2m as shown in Diagram 16(c) and (d).
Vertical strapping may be omitted if the roof:a.  has a pitch of 15 or more, andb.  is tiled or slated, andc.  is of a type known by local experience to be resistant to wind gusts, andd.  has main timber members spanning onto the supported wall at not more than 1.2m centres.
2C37  Where an opening in a floor or roof for a stairway or the like adjoins a supported wall and interrupts the continuity of lateral support, the following conditions should be satisfied for the purposes of Section 2C:a.  the maximum permitted length of the opening is to be 3m, measured parallel to the supported wall, andb.  where a connection is provided by means other than by anchor, this should be provided throughout the length of each portion of the wall situated on each side of the opening, andc.  where a connection is provided by mild steel anchors, these should be spaced closer than 2m on each side of the opening to provide the same number of anchors as if there were no opening, andd.  there should be no other interruption of lateral support.
The floor area of the building or annexe does not exceed 36m.
c.  Where the floor area of the building or annexe exceeds 10m the walls have a mass of not less than 130kg/m.
f.  The maximum length or width of the building or annexe does not exceed 9m.
g.  The height of the building or annexe does not exceed the lower value derived from Diagram 2.h.  The roof is braced at rafter level, horizontally at eaves level and at the base of any gable by roof decking, rigid sarking or diagonal timber bracing, as appropriate, in accordance with BS EN 199511:2004 with its UK National Annex and additional guidance given in BSI.
Size and location of openings.
One or two major openings not more than 2.1m in height are permitted in one wall of the building or annexe only.
The width of a single opening or the combined width of two openings should not exceed 5m.
Walls which do not contain a major opening but exceed 2.5m in length or height should be bonded or tied to piers for their full height at not more than 3m centres as shown in Diagram 18a.
Where ties are used to connect piers to walls they should be flat, 20mm x 3mm in cross section, be in stainless steel in accordance with paragraph 2C19, be placed in pairs and be spaced at not more than 300mm centre vertically.
Horizontal lateral restraint at roof levelWalls should be tied horizontally at no more than 2m centres to the roof structure at eaves level, base of gables and along roof slopes as shown in Diagram 19 with straps fixed in accordance with paragraphs 2C35 and 2C36.
should not exceed 4.5W, provided the density of the masonry is greater than 1500kg/m3, where:W is the least horizontal dimension of the chimney measured at the same point of intersection, andH is measured to the top of any chimney pot or other flue terminal (see Diagram 20).
Conditions relating to the ground.
2E1  There should not be:a.  non-engineered fill (as described in BRE Digest 427) or wide variation in ground conditions within the loaded area; norb.  weaker or more compressible ground at such a depth below the foundation as could impair the stability of the structure.
Design provisions.
2E2  The following design provisions relate to foundations:a.  the foundations should be situated centrally under the wall;b.  for foundations in chemically aggressive soil conditions guidance in BS 85001 and BRE Special Digest 1 should be followed.
In non-aggressive soils, concrete should be composed of Portland cement to BS EN 1971 and 2 and fine and coarse aggregate conforming to BS EN 12620 and the mix should comply with one of the following recommendations:in proportion of 50kg of Portland cement to not more than 200kg (0.1m3) of fine aggregate and 400kg (0.2m3) of coarse aggregate; orii.
grade ST2 or grade GEN I concrete to  BS 85002;c.  minimum thickness T of concrete foundation should be 150mm or P, whichever is the greater, where P is derived using Table 10 and Diagram 23.
For trench fill foundations the overlap should be twice the height of the step or 1m, whichever is greater;e.  steps in foundations should not be of greater height than the thickness of the foundation (see Diagram 21);foundations for piers, buttresses and chimneys should project as indicated in Diagram 22 and the projection X should never be less than the value of P where there is no local thickening of the wall.
FOUNDATIONS OF PLAIN CONCRETE.
In clay soils subject to volume change on drying (shrinkable clays, with Modified Plasticity Index greater than or equal to 10), strip foundations should be taken to a depth where anticipated ground movements will not impair the stability of any part of the building taking due consideration of the influence of vegetation and trees on the ground.
Section 3: Wall cladding.
vehicle barrier, then account should be taken of the additional imposed loading, as stipulated in Approved Document K, Protection from falling, collision and impact.
The selection of fixings for supporting Fixingscladding should be determined from a consideration of the proven performance of the fixing and the risks associated with the particular application.
In this regard applications should be designated as being either nonredundant (where the failure of a single fixing could lead to the detachment of the cladding) or redundant (where failure or excessive movement of one fixing results in load sharing by adjacent fixings) and the required reliability of the fixing determined accordingly.
The strength of fixings should be derived from tests using materials representative of the material into which the fixing is to be anchored, taking account of any inherent weaknesses that may affect the strength of the fixing, e.g.
cracks in concrete due to shrinkage and flexure, or voids in masonry construction.
An acceptable level of safety can be achieved by different means depending on the type and location of the cladding.
This shall comprise both vertical support and horizontal restraint, andc.  provision is made, where necessary, to accommodate differential movement of the cladding and the supporting structure of the building, andd.  the cladding and its fixings (including any support components) are of durable materials; the design life of the fixings being not less than that of the cladding.
Fixings shall be corrosion resistant and of a material type appropriate for the local environment.
Loading.
3.3  Wind loading on the cladding should be derived from BS EN 199114:2005 with its UK National Annex with due consideration given to local increases in wind suction arising from funnelling of the wind through gaps between buildings.
antennae and signboards, account should be taken of the loads and forces arising from such fixtures and fittings.
3.5  Where the wall cladding is required to function as pedestrian guarding to stairs, ramps, vertical drops of more than 600mm in dwellings or more than the height of two risers (or 380mm if not part of a stair) in other buildings, or as a vehicle barrier, then account should be taken of the additional imposed loading, as stipulated in Approved Document K, Protection from falling, collision and impact.
Section 4: Roof covering.
Materials.
All materials used to cover roofs, excluding windows of glass in residential buildings with roof pitches of not less than 15, shall be capable of safely withstanding the concentrated imposed loads upon roofs specified in BS EN 199111:2002 with its UK National Annex.
4.3  Where the work involves a significant change in the applied loading the structural integrity of the roof structure and the supporting structure should be checked to ensure that upon completion of the work the building is not less compliant with Requirement A1 than the original building.
A significant change in roof loading is when the loading upon the roof is increased by more than 15.due to overstressed members or unacceptable deflection leading to ponding), appropriate strengthening work or replacement of roofing members should be undertaken.
The building shall be constructed so that in the event of an accident the building will not suffer collapse to an extent disproportionate to the cause.
Alternatively, check that upon the notional removal of each supporting column and each beam supporting one or more columns, or any nominal length of loadbearing wall (one at a time in each storey of the building), the building remains stable and that the area of floor at any storey at risk of collapse does not exceed 15 of the floor area of that storey or 100m2, whichever is smaller, and does not extend further than the immediate adjacent storeys (see Diagram 24).
Critical situations for design should be selected that reflect the conditions that can reasonably be foreseen as possible during the life of the building.
5.2   Details of the effective horizontal and vertical ties including tie force determination, together with the design approaches for checking the integrity of the building following the notional removal of vertical members and the design of key elements, are given in the following Standards:BS EN 1990:2002A1:2005 Eurocode  Basis of structural design; with UK National Annex to BS EN 1990:2002A1:2005BS EN 199117:2006 Eurocode 1: Actions on structures  Part 1.7: General actions  Accidental actions; with UK National Annex to BS EN 199117: 2006 and BSI PD 668817: 2009BS EN 199211:2004 Eurocode 2: Design of concrete structures  Part 1.1: General rules and rules for buildings; with UK National Annex to BS EN 199211:2004 and BSI PD 66871:2010BS EN 199311:2005 Eurocode 3: Design of steel structures  Part 1.1: General rules and rules for buildings; with UK National Annex to BS EN 199311:2005BS EN 199411:2004 Eurocode 4: Design of composite steel and concrete structures  Part 1.1: General rules and rules for buildings; with UK National Annex to BS EN 199411:2004Where the notional removal of such columns and lengths of walls would result in an extent of damage in excess of the above limit, then such elements should be designed as a key element as defined in paragraph 5.3 below.
BS EN 199511:2004A1:2008 Eurocode 5: Design of timber structures  Part 1.1: General  Common rules and rules for buildings; with UK National Annex to BS EN 199511:2004A1:2008 and BSI PD 66931:2012e.  For Consequence Class 3 buildings  A systematic risk assessment of the building should be undertaken taking into account all the normal hazards that may reasonably be foreseen, together with any abnormal hazards.
BS EN 199611:2005A1:2012 Eurocode 6: Design of masonry structures  Part 1.1: General rules for reinforced and unreinforced masonry structures; with UK National Annex to  BS EN 199611:2005A1:2012 and BSI PD 6697:2010.
REDUCING THE SENSITIVITY OF THE BUILDING TO DISPROPORTIONATE COLLAPSE IN THE EVENT OF AN ACCIDENT.
9: Design of aluminium structures  Part 1.1: General structural rules; with UK National Annex to BS EN 199911:2007A1:2009 and  BSI PD 67021:2009.
5.3  Definitions.
Nominal length of load-bearing wallThe nominal length of load-bearing wall construction referred to in 5.1d should be taken as follows:  in the case of a reinforced concrete wall, the distance between lateral supports subject to a maximum length not exceeding 2.25H,  in the case of an external masonry wall, or timber or steel stud wall, the length measured between vertical lateral supports,  in the case of an internal masonry wall, or timber or steel stud wall, a length not exceeding 2.25H,where H is the storey height in metres.
key elementsA key element, as referred to in paragraph 5.1d, should be capable of sustaining an accidental design loading of 34kN/m2 applied in the horizontal and vertical directions (in one direction at a time) to the member and any attached components (e.g.
cladding etc.)
having regard to the ultimate strength of such components and their connections.
Such accidental design loading should be assumed to act simultaneously with all other design loadings (i.e.
wind and imposed loading) in accidental actions loading combination.
