Section 0: Introduction

Summary

0.1  This approved document is Approved Document L, Volume 2: Buildings other than dwellings. It 

gives guidance on how to comply with Part L of Schedule 1 to the Building Regulations and the 

energy efficiency requirements for buildings other than dwellings. For guidance relating to domestic 

buildings, use Approved Document L, Volume 1: Dwellings.

0.2  This approved document contains the following sections:

Approved document section

Related Building Regulations requirements

Section 0: Introduction

Section 1: Calculating the target primary energy rate and 

target emission rate

Section 2: Calculating the building primary energy rate 

and building emission rate

Regulations 24, 25, 25B, 26, 26C, 27 and 27C

Section 3: Consideration of highefficiency alternative 

systems 

Regulation 25A

Section 4: Limiting heat gains and losses 

Requirement L1(a) of Schedule 1

Section 5: Minimum building services efficiencies and 

controls  general guidance

Requirements L1(b)(i), (ii) and L2 of Schedule 1

Section 6: System specific guidance

Section 7: Air permeability and pressure testing 

Regulation 43

Section 8: Commissioning

Regulations 44 and 44ZA and requirements L1(b)(iii) and 

L2(b) of Schedule 1

Section 9: Providing information

Regulations 40 and 40A

Section 10: New elements in existing buildings, including 

extensions 

Regulation 23(2) and requirement L1(a) of Schedule 1

Section 11: Work to elements in existing buildings 

Regulations 6, 22 and 23(1) and requirement L1(a) of Schedule 1

Section 12: Consequential improvements 

Regulation 28

Appendix A: Key terms 

Appendix B: Lighting Energy Numeric Indicator (LENI) 

Appendix C: Reporting evidence of compliance 

Appendix D: Measures for consequential improvements

Appendix E: Hierarchy for establishing seasonal 

efficiencies of existing boilers

Appendix F: Standards referred to

Appendix G: Documents referred to 

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Application

0.3  The guidance in Approved Document L, Volume 2 applies only to buildings other than dwellings. 

In a mixeduse building, this document should be consulted for building work in those parts of the 

building that are not dwellings. This document gives guidance for building work in both new and 

existing buildings.

NOTE: Dwellings are selfcontained units. This approved document applies to both of the 

following, which are not dwellings. 

a.  Rooms for residential purposes.

b.  Buildings that contain only rooms for residential purposes. 

For dwellings, Approved Document L, Volume 1: Dwellings applies. 

0.4  In the Secretary of States view, for the purposes of the energy efficiency requirements of the 

Building Regulations, a building means either of the following.

a.  The whole of the building.

b.  Part of a building designed or altered to be used as a separate premises.

Common areas in buildings that contain multiple dwellings

0.5  For the common areas of buildings that contain more than one dwelling, the following guidance 

applies.

If the common areas are heated, the guidance in this approved document should be followed.

If the common areas are unheated, individual fabric elements should meet the minimum 

standards set out in Section 4 of Approved Document L, Volume 1: Dwellings.

New buildings

0.6  Guidance for new buildings is given in Sections 1 to 9 of this approved document, Approved 

Document L, Volume 2.

0.7  For a conservatory or porch installed as part of the construction of a new building, the treatment 

of the conservatory or porch depends on whether both of the following have been achieved.

a.  There is adequate thermal separation between the building and the conservatory or porch.

b.  The buildings heating system is not extended into the conservatory or porch.

If both (a) and (b) have been achieved, the conservatory or porch should be treated as if it were an 

extension being added onto an existing building. The guidance for new elements in existing buildings 

in Section 10 should be followed.

If either or both of (a) or (b) has not been achieved, the conservatory or porch should be treated as a 

room in the new building. The guidance for the whole new building should be followed, including for 

building primary energy rate and building emission rate calculations.

0.8  For the first fitout works in buildings, such as shellandcore office buildings, guidance for new 

buildings covering first fitout should be followed. For any subsequent fitout works the guidance 

for existing buildings should be followed.

0.9  For constructing a building from modular subassemblies, or for relocating a modular or 

portable building, the guidance for new buildings should be followed, taking note of the special 

considerations for these building types outlined in Section 2. If the work extends an existing 

building, consequential improvements may also be required. Guidance is given in Section 12.

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

Extensions to and work on existing buildings

0.10  Guidance for existing buildings is given in this approved document for the following. 

a.  Limiting heat gains and losses: Section 4. 

b.  Building services: Sections 5 and 6. 

c.  New elements in existing buildings, including replacing a thermal element and constructing an 

extension: Section 10. 

d.  Existing elements in existing buildings, including renovating or retaining a thermal element, 

material change of use and change to energy status: Section 11. 

e.  consequential improvements: Section 12.

Exemptions

0.11  The following classes of buildings or parts of buildings other than dwellings are exempt from the 

energy efficiency requirements.

a.  Places of worship  buildings or parts of a building that are used primarily or solely for formal 

public worship, plus adjoining spaces the function of which is directly linked to that use (e.g. a 

vestry in a church).

NOTE: Parts of the building that are designed to be used separately, such as offices, catering 

facilities, day centres, meeting halls and accommodation, are not exempt from the energy 

efficiency requirements.

b.  Temporary buildings with a total planned time of use of two years or less.

c.  Buildings with low energy demand which are industrial sites, workshops or nonresidential 

agricultural buildings.

NOTE: Low energy demand only relates to the energy used by fixed heating or cooling systems, not to 

energy required for or created by process needs. This includes buildings or parts of buildings where the 

space is not generally heated or cooled other than by process heat or buildings or parts of buildings 

that only require heating or cooling for short periods each year, such as during critical periods in the 

production cycle (e.g. plant germination, egg hatching) or during very severe weather conditions.

NOTE: Portable or modular buildings with a planned service life of longer than two years, whether 

on one or more sites, are not exempt. See paragraphs 2.11 to 2.19.

d.  New and existing standalone buildings other than dwellings, with a total useful floor area of 

less than 50m2.

e.  Carports, covered yards, covered ways and some conservatories and porches (see paragraphs 0.18 

to 0.19).

Exemptions for listed buildings, buildings in conservation areas and scheduled 

monuments 

0.12  Work to the following types of buildings does not need to comply fully with the energy efficiency 

requirements where to do so would unacceptably alter the buildings character or appearance. 

a.  Those listed in accordance with section 1 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation 

Areas) Act 1990.

b.  Those in a conservation area designated in accordance with section 69 of the Planning (Listed 

Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990.

c.  Those included in the schedule of monuments maintained under section 1 of the Ancient 

Monuments and Archaeological Areas Act 1979.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

0.13  Work to a building in paragraph 0.12 must comply with the energy efficiency requirements where 

this would not unacceptably alter the buildings character or appearance. The work should comply 

with standards in this approved document to the extent that it is reasonably practicable. 

Historic and traditional buildings

0.14  The energy efficiency of historic and traditional buildings should be improved only if doing so will 

not cause longterm deterioration of the buildings fabric or fittings. In particular, this applies to 

historic and traditional buildings with a vapour permeable construction that both absorbs moisture 

and readily allow moisture to evaporate. Examples include those built with wattle and daub, cob or 

stone and constructions using lime render or mortar.

0.15  New extensions to historic or traditional buildings should comply fully with the energy efficiency 

standards in this approved document unless there is a need to match the external appearance or 

character of the extension to that of the host building. The work should comply with standards in 

this approved document to the extent that it is reasonably practicable.

0.16  In determining whether full energy efficiency improvements should be made, the building control 

body should consider the advice of the local authoritys conservation officer. 

0.17  Additional guidance is available in Historic Englands Energy Efficiency in Historic Buildings: 

Application of Part L of the Building Regulations to Historic and Traditionally Constructed Buildings.

Exemptions for conservatories and porches

0.18  Where a building is extended by adding a conservatory or porch, the work is exempt from the  

energy efficiency requirements, under regulation 21 of the Building Regulations, if all of the 

following apply.

a.  The extension is at ground level.

b.  The floor area of the extension does not exceed 30m2.

c.  The glazing complies with Part K of Schedule 1 to the Building Regulations.

d.  Any wall, door or window that separates the extension from the building has been retained or,  

if removed, replaced with a wall, door or window.

NOTE: Replacement walls, windows and doors should meet the requirement in regulation 23(2). See 

Section 10.

e.  The heating system of the building is not extended into the conservatory or porch.

Exemptions for covered areas 

0.19  Where a building is extended by adding a carport that is open on at least two sides, a covered yard, 

covered walkway or covered driveway, the work is exempt from the energy efficiency requirements 

if both of the following apply.

a.  The extension is at ground level.

b.  The floor area of the extension does not exceed 30m2.

Live/work units

0.20 A building that contains both living accommodation and space for commercial purposes (e.g. for 

a workshop or office) should be treated as a dwelling if the commercial part can be reverted to 

domestic use. Guidance for dwellings can be found in Approved Document L, Volume 1: Dwellings.

0.21  The commercial part of a building can be reverted to domestic use if all of the following apply. 

a.  There is direct access between the commercial space and the living accommodation.

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

b.  The commercial space and the living accommodation are within the same thermal envelope. 

c.  The living accommodation comprises a substantial proportion of the total area of the unit. 

What constitutes a substantial proportion should be assessed on a casebycase basis by the 

building control body.

NOTE: A large nondomestic building that contains a small flat for a manager is not treated as a 

dwelling. A dwelling that contains a room used as an office or utility space is still treated as a dwelling.

Mixeduse developments

0.22 When constructing a building that contains dwellings and other types of accommodation, sometimes 

called a mixeduse development, refer to the two volumes of Approved Document L as follows.

a.  For guidance on each individual dwelling, use Approved Document L, Volume 1: Dwellings. 

b.  For guidance on the nondwelling parts of the building, such as heated common areas and any 

commercial or retail space, use this approved document.

Selected key interactions with other parts of the Building 

Regulations 

0.23 The approved documents set out what, in ordinary circumstances, may be accepted as one way 

to comply with the Building Regulations. Those designing or undertaking building work remain 

responsible for assessing, on a casebycase basis, whether specific circumstances require additional 

or alternative measures to achieve compliance with the regulatory requirements. There are 

interactions between many of the requirements of the Building Regulations. Guidance on some key 

interactions is given below.

Interaction with Part C

0.24 This approved document, Approved Document L, Volume 2, provides guidance and examples on 

upgrading thermal elements. For interstitial and surface condensation, a lesser standard may be 

acceptable. Guidance in Approved Document C should be followed.

Interaction with Part E 

0.25 This approved document, Approved Document L, Volume 2, provides guidance on insulation that 

is reasonably continuous and limits thermal bridging. Construction junctions should limit noise 

transfer where Part E of the Building Regulations sets a requirement. Approved Document E should 

be followed.

Interaction with Part F 

0.26 This approved document, Approved Document L, Volume 2, provides guidance on reducing unwanted 

heat loss, by achieving optimum airtightness. When specifying the minimum amount of purpose

provided ventilation, consider the air infiltration of a building; follow Approved Document F.

Interaction with Part J

0.27 This approved document, Approved Document L, Volume 2, provides guidance on airtightness. For 

guidance on permanent ventilation openings for open flued appliances in very airtight buildings, 

follow Approved Document J.

Interaction with Part K and Part M 

0.28 This approved document, Approved Document L, Volume 2, provides guidance on controls for fixed 

building services and onsite electricity generation. Manual controls, where provided, should be 

within reasonable reach of the occupants. Follow the guidance in Approved Documents K and M.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Regulations 24, 25, 25B, 26, 26C, 27 and 27C: 

Energy performance of building calculations 

This section deals with the requirements of regulations 24, 25, 25B, 26, 26C, 27 and 27C of the Building  

Regulations 2010.

Regulations

Methodology of calculation of the energy performance

(1)  The Secretary of State shall approve

(a)   a methodology of calculation of the energy performance of buildings, including methods for calculating 

asset ratings and operational ratings of buildings; and

(b)   ways in which the energy performance of buildings, as calculated in accordance with the methodology, 

shall be expressed.

(2)  In this regulation

 asset rating means an energy performance indicator determined from the amount of energy estimated to 

meet the different needs associated with a standardised use of the building; and

 operational rating means an energy performance indicator determined from the amount of energy 

consumed during the occupation of a building over a period of time and the energy demand associated 

with a typical use of the building over that period.

Minimum energy performance requirements for new buildings 

 Minimum energy performance requirements shall be approved by the Secretary of State, calculated and 

expressed in accordance with the methodology approved pursuant to regulation 24, for

(a)  new buildings (which shall include new dwellings), in the form of target CO2 emission rates; 

(b)  new dwellings, in the form of target fabric efficiency rates, and

(c)  new buildings in the form of target primary energy rates.

Nearly zeroenergy requirements for new buildings

25B.  Where a building is erected, it must be a nearly zeroenergy building.

CO2 emission rates for new buildings

26.    Where a building is erected, it shall not exceed the target CO2 emission rate for the building that has been 

approved pursuant to regulation 25, applying the methodology of calculation and expression of the energy 

performance of buildings approved pursuant to regulation 24. 

Target primary energy rates for new buildings

26C.   Where a building is erected it must not exceed the target primary energy rate for the building which has been 

approved pursuant to regulation 25(c), applying the methodology of calculation and expression of the energy 

performance of buildings approved pursuant to regulation 24.

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R2427C 

Regulation continued 

CO2 emission rate calculations

(1)  This regulation applies where a building is erected and regulation 26 applies.

(2)   Not later than the day before the work starts, the person carrying out the work shall give the local 

authority a notice which specifies

(a)   the target CO2 emission rate for the building, calculated and expressed in accordance with the 

methodology approved pursuant to regulation 24,

(b)   the CO2 emission rate for the building as designed, calculated and expressed in accordance with the 

methodology approved pursuant to regulation 24, and

(c)  a list of specifications to which the building is to be constructed.

(3)   Not later than five days after the work has been completed, the person carrying out the work shall give the 

local authority

(a)  a notice which specifies

(i)   the target CO2 emission rate for the building, calculated and expressed in accordance with the 

methodology approved pursuant to regulation 24,

(ii)   the CO2 emission rate for the building as constructed, calculated and expressed in accordance with 

the methodology approved pursuant to regulation 24, and

(iii)  whether the building has been constructed in accordance with the list of specifications referred to in 

paragraph (2)(c), and if not a list of any changes to those specifications; or

(b)   a certificate of the sort referred to in paragraph (4) accompanied by the information referred to in sub

paragraph (a).

(4)   A local authority are authorised to accept, as evidence that the requirements of regulation 26 have 

been satisfied, a certificate to that effect by an energy assessor who is accredited to produce energy 

performance certificates for that category of building.

(5)   In this regulation, specifications means specifications used for the calculation of the CO2 emission rate.

Target primary energy rate calculations for new buildings

27C.  (1)    This regulation applies where a building is erected.

(2)   Not later than the day before the work starts, the person carrying out the work must give the local 

authority a notice which specifies

(a)   the target primary energy rate for the building calculated and expressed in accordance with the 

methodology approved pursuant to regulation 24;

(b)   the calculated target primary energy rate for the building as designed, calculated and expressed in 

accordance with the methodology approved pursuant to regulation 24; and

(c)   the list of specifications to which the building is to be constructed.

(3)   Not later than five days after the work has been completed, the person carrying out the work must give the 

local authority

(a)  a notice which specifies

(i)   the target primary energy rate for the building calculated and expressed in accordance with the 

methodology approved pursuant to regulation 24;

(ii)  t he calculated target primary energy rate for the building as constructed, calculated and expressed in 

accordance with the methodology approved pursuant to regulation 24; and

(iii)  whether the building has been constructed in accordance with the list of specifications referred to in 

paragraph (2)(c), and if not a list of any changes to those specifications; or

(b)   a certificate of the sort referred to in paragraph (4) accompanied by the information referred to in sub

paragraph (a).

(4)   A local authority is authorised to accept, as evidence that the requirements of regulation 26C have 

been satisfied, a certificate to that effect by an energy assessor who is accredited to produce energy 

performance certificates for that category of building.

(5)   In this regulation, specifications means specifications used for the calculation of the target primary energy 

rate.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

R2427C 

NOTE: Where the building control body is an approved inspector, see regulation 20 of the Building 

(Approved Inspectors etc.) Regulations 2010 (as amended).

Intention 

Regulation 24

Regulation 24 requires the Secretary of State to approve a methodology of calculation of the energy 

performance of a building. Approved tools for implementing this methodology for new nondomestic 

buildings are the Simplified Building Energy Model or other software tools approved under the 

Notice of Approval. 

Calculation methodologies are set out in Section 1 and Section 2 of this approved document.

Regulation 25 

Regulation 25 requires the Secretary of State to approve minimum energy performance requirements. 

These requirements are in the form of a target primary energy rate and a target emission rate.

The targets are set out in Section 1 of this approved document.

Regulation 25B 

The Secretary of State considers that a building has a very high performance rate for the purposes of 

the definition of a nearly zeroenergy building if both of the following are met. 

a.  The building meets the target emission rate required under regulation 26. 

b.  Both:

i.  An analysis is made of the technical, environmental and economic feasibility of using high 

efficiency alternative systems, which include decentralised energy supply systems based on 

energy from renewable sources. 

ii.  This analysis is considered as required by regulation 25A. 

Regulations 26 and 26C 

A newly constructed building must be shown to meet regulations 26 and 26C by producing 

calculations to show that the building meets both of the following.

a.  Target primary energy rate.

b.  Target emission rate.

Section 2 of this approved document sets out how to produce these calculations.

Regulations 27 and 27C

Both before and after a newly constructed building is built, a notice must be given to the building 

control body of the calculations.

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R2427CSection 1: Calculating the target primary 

energy rate and target emission rate  

1.1  A new building must be built to a minimum standard of total energy performance. This is evaluated 

by comparing calculations of the performance of the actual building against calculations of the 

performance of a theoretical building, called the notional building. This must be carried out both 

at the design stage and when work is complete. 

The notional building is the same size and shape as the actual building and has standardised 

properties for fabric and services. The full properties of the notional building are set out in the 

National Calculation Methodology Modelling Guide, which is available from https://www.ukncm.

org.uk/.

1.2  The energy performance of the notional building is described using the following metrics.

a.  The target primary energy rate, in kWhPE/m2 per year.

b.  The target emission rate, in kgCO2/m2 per year. 

1.3  The target primary energy rate and target emission rate must be calculated using one of the 

calculation tools in the approved methodology, used in line with the version policy as stated in the 

methodology. As part of the submission to the building control body, the applicant should show 

that the software tool used is appropriate to the application. The calculation tool can be either of 

the following. 

a.  The Simplified Building Energy Model (SBEM), for buildings with design features that are capable 

of being adequately modelled by the Simplified Building Energy Model.

b.  Other software tools approved under the Notice of Approval.

NOTE: An uptodate list of approved software can be found on the Department for Levelling Up, 

Housing and Communities webpages. 

NOTE: Information on the approved methodology, the version policy for these tools and how to 

choose an appropriate modelling tool can be found in the National Calculation Methodology 

Modelling Guide.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

R2427CSection 2: Calculating the building primary 

energy rate and building emission rate

2.1  The same approved calculation tool must be used to calculate the target primary energy rate, the 

target emission rate, the building primary energy rate and the building emission rate.

2.2  The building primary energy rate and the building emission rate must be calculated at both of the 

following points using the same calculation tool.

a.  Before work starts, using design values. 

b.  When work is complete, using figures for the building as constructed, and incorporating both of 

the following. 

i.  Any changes that have been made during construction to the list of specifications. 

ii.  The measured air permeability. 

2.3  At both of these points the building primary energy rate and building emission rate must not 

exceed the target primary energy rate and the target emission rate, respectively. The specification 

of the actual building may vary from that of the notional building if the building meets the target 

primary energy rate, target emission rate and the guidance in this approved document. 

Building control notification 

2.4  The building control body must be notified, before the work starts, of all of the following. 

a.  The target primary energy rate and the building primary energy rate (calculated using design 

values).

b.  The target emission rate and the building emission rate (calculated using design values).

c.  A list of specifications used in the calculations.

Items (a) to (c) above may be reported using the design stage Building Regulations UK Part L 

compliance report (BRUKL report) which is produced as a standardised output from the approved 

software. For further details of the design stage BRUKL report, see Appendix C.

2.5  The building control body must be notified, once the work is complete, of all of the following. 

a.  The asbuilt target primary energy rate and asbuilt building primary energy rate.

b.  The asbuilt target emission rate and the asbuilt building emission rate.

c.  A list of specifications used in the asbuilt calculations, and whether the specifications have 

changed from those used in the design stage calculations.

Building control bodies are authorised to accept notification of (a) to (c) above as reported in the 

asbuilt BRUKL report, which is produced as a standardised output from the approved software.  

For further details of the asbuilt BRUKL report, see Appendix C.

10  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R2427CHeating in the building primary energy rate and the building 

emission rate calculations

2.6  When systems are capable of being fired by more than one fuel, the following applies, according to 

the fuel(s). 

a.  Biomass heating supplemented by an alternative appliance (e.g. gas)  the CO2 emission factor 

and primary energy factor should be based on a weighted average for the two fuels. The 

weighting should be based on the anticipated usage of those fuels. The building emission rate 

and building primary energy rate submission should be accompanied by a report, signed by a 

suitably qualified person, detailing how the combined emission factor has been derived.

b.  Appliances capable of burning both biomass fuel and fossil fuel  the CO2 emission factor and 

primary energy factor for dualfuel appliances should be used, except where the building is in a 

smoke control area, when the anthracite figure should be used.

In all other cases, the fuel with the highest CO2 emission factor should be used.

If thermal energy is supplied from a district heat network or community heating system or 

community cooling system, CO2 emission factors and primary energy factors should be determined 

by considering the details of the scheme and following the guidance in items (a) to (g) below.

a.  The CO2 emission factor and primary energy factor for the heat delivered to the building by the 

district heat network should be based on the heat network specific factors from Table 32 in the 

National Calculation Methodology Modelling Guide. 

b.  Calculations should take account of the annual average performance of the whole system, 

including the distribution circuits, all heat generating plants, combined heat and power (CHP), 

and any waste heat recovery or heat dumping.

c.  The calculation should include the predicted effect of all buildings or parts of buildings that 

will be connected to the system in the first 12 months of operation. A change in the number of 

buildings or spaces within buildings connected to the system might affect the percentage of 

heat supplied from the communal system. The increased operation of any marginal plant (e.g. gas 

boilers) can then be properly accounted for.

d.  The electricity generated by any combined heat and power (CHP) or trigeneration scheme should 

always be credited using the appropriate CO2 emission and primary energy heat network specific 

factors from Table 32 in the National Calculation Methodology Modelling Guide.

e.  CO2 emissions and primary energy associated with the thermal energy streams of a trigeneration 

scheme should be attributed in proportion to the output energy streams.

f.  When calculating the building primary energy rate and building emission rate for a building 

connected to a new district heat network, the calculation should include all heat sources to 

be used up to 31 December 2027. In this way, any planned transition of the heat network to 

an alternative means of heat generation will be properly accounted for. When there will be a 

change in heat source up to 31 December 2027, a submission to the building control body should 

be made to show both of the following.

i.  That planning permission, if required, has been granted for the change.

ii.  That the heat network will connect to the new source, with confirmation in the form of a 

signed contract to connect and supply heat. 

NOTE: An existing district heat network is defined in Appendix A. A new district heat network 

should be taken as meaning any other district heat network. 

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

R2427CNOTE: When calculating the building primary energy rate and building emission rate for a building 

connected to an existing district heat network, the calculation should not include the effect of any 

change in heat sources after the buildings are connected. 

g.  The building primary energy rate and building emission rate submission should be accompanied 

by a report, signed by a suitably qualified person, detailing how the CO2 emission factors and 

primary energy factors have been derived.

The primary energy factor for the heat output should be taken as: 

1/H  (F  PEF  E  PEE)

where:

H is the useful heat (excluding heat rejected) in kWh

F is the fuel input in kWh

PEF is the primary energy factor for the input fuel in kWhPE/kWh

E is the electricity production from the scheme in kWh

PEE is the primary energy factor for district heat CHP generated electricity in kWhPE/kWh.

The CO2 emission factor for the heat output should be taken as:

1/H  (F  CO2F  E  CO2E )

where: 

H is the useful heat (excluding heat rejected) in kWh

F is the fuel input in kWh

CO2F is the emission factor for the input fuel in kgCO2 /kWh

E is the electricity production from the scheme in kWh

CO2E is the emission factor for district heat CHP generated electricity in kgCO2 /kWh.

NOTE: See the National Calculation Methodology Modelling Guide for further information.

NOTE: The same CO2 emission factors used to calculate the building emission rate for buildings 

connected to a district heat network or community heating system should be used to check against 

the minimum performance standards described in Section 6 of this approved document.

Management and control features in the building primary 

energy rate and the building emission rate calculations

2.8  Where enhanced management and control features are provided in the building, the building 

primary energy rate and building emission rate can be reduced. This is done by applying the 

appropriate factor given in Table 2.1 to both of the following, for the system(s) to which the feature 

is being applied. 

a.  The CO2 emissions.

b.  The primary energy.

NOTE: For example, if the CO2 emissions due to electrical energy consumption were 70kgCO2/

(m2year) without power factor correction, the provision of correction equipment to achieve 

a power factor of 0.95 would enable the building emission rate to be reduced by 70  0.025  

1.75kgCO2/(m2year).

12  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R2427CTable 2.1  Enhanced management and control features

Feature

Automatic monitoring and targeting with alarms for outofrange values(1)

Power factor correction to achieve a whole building power factor 0.90(2)

Power factor correction to achieve a whole building power factor 0.95(2)

Adjustment factor

0.050

0.010

0.025

NOTES:

1.  This means a complete installation that measures, records, transmits, analyses, reports and communicates 

meaningful energy management information to enable the operator to manage the energy it uses. A building 

automation and control system specified following paragraphs 6.66 to 6.73 would meet this definition. 

2.  The power factor adjustment can be made only if the whole building power factor is corrected to achieve the 

value in this table (90 or 0.95). The two levels of power factor correction are alternative values, not additive.

Achieving the target primary energy rate and target 

emission rate 

2.9  Provided the building satisfies the minimum standards for fabric elements set out in Section 4, 

the designer can achieve the target primary energy rate and target emission rate by using any 

combination of the following.

a.  Fabric energy efficiency.

b.  Efficient building services.

c.  Low and zero carbon technologies integrated in an appropriate mix. 

NOTE: The target primary energy rate and target emission rate are not likely to be met by using the 

minimum standards for fabric set out in Section 4 alone.

Special considerations when calculating building primary 

energy rate and building emission rate

2.10  Special considerations may apply to certain classes of building. These building types include all of 

the following.

a.  Modular and portable buildings with a planned service life of more than two years (at one or 

more sites), follow paragraphs 2.11 to 2.19.

b.  Swimming pools, follow paragraph 2.20. 

c.  Shell and core developments, follow paragraphs 2.21 to 2.25.

d.  Industrial sites, workshops and nonresidential agricultural buildings, follow paragraph 2.26. 

e.  Buildings with low energy demand, follow paragraphs 2.27 to 2.32.

NOTE: Industrial sites, workshops and nonresidential agricultural buildings with low energy 

demand and buildings with a planned service life of less than two years are exempt from the 

energy efficiency requirements. See paragraph 0.11.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

R2427CModular and portable buildings with a planned service life of more than two years

2.11  Placing an existing module on a new site is considered by the Building Regulations to be the 

construction of a new building.

2.12  Special considerations apply to modular and portable buildings with a planned service life of more 

than two years.

a.  For modular and portable buildings at a single location, follow paragraphs 2.13 to 2.15. 

b.  For modular and portable buildings intended for use at more than one location, for example 

under hire agreements, follow paragraphs 2.16 to 2.19.

At a single location

2.13  Modular and portable buildings with a planned service life of more than two years at a single 

location should be shown to comply with the energy efficiency requirements.

2.14  If more than 70 of the external envelope of this type of building will be created from sub

assemblies manufactured before the date when this approved document came into force, the 

target primary energy rate and target emission rate should be multiplied by the relevant factors 

from Table 2.2. 

NOTE: One way of demonstrating the date of manufacture of each subassembly is by relating the 

serial number to the manufacturers records.

2.15  After initial manufacture, any work on a module should meet the standards in this document, 

treating it as work on an existing building. Fabric elements that will be refurbished or replaced in 

modular subassemblies should meet the minimum standards given in Section 4. Fixed building 

services elements that will be replaced in modular subassemblies should meet the minimum 

standards in Sections 5 and 6. 

Date of manufacture of 70 of modules 

making up the external envelope

Target primary energy rate 

multiplying factor

Target emission rate  

multiplying factor

After the coming into force date

6 April 2014  coming into force date

1 Oct 2010  5 April 2014

6 April 2006  30 Sept 2010

Pre 6 April 2006

At more than one location

2.16  Modular and portable buildings with a planned service life of more than two years but with an 

intended time of use in a single location of less than two years should be shown to comply with 

the energy efficiency requirements. An example of this type of building would be a modular or 

portable building intended for short term hire to multiple locations.

NOTE: An example of evidence that the planned time of use in the given location is less than two 

years is the hire agreement for the unit.

14  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R2427CTable 2.2  Target primary energy rate and target emission rate multiplying factors for modular and portable buildings with a service life of more than two years at a single location2.17  For modular or portable buildings of the type described in paragraph 2.16, a target primary energy 

rate and building primary energy rate calculation and target emission rate and building emission rate 

calculation should be carried out when the portable building or its modular components are first 

constructed. The calculation can be based on a standard generic configuration of modules. 

Whenever the building is moved to a new location, in which its intended time of use is less than two 

years, these calculations can be provided as evidence that the energy efficiency requirements are 

met. The supplier should provide all the following in writing.

a.  Details of the calculation.

b.  Confirmation that the modules as provided meet or exceed the elemental energy standards of 

the generic module on which the calculation was based.

c.  Confirmation that the activities assumed in the generic module are reasonably representative of 

the planned use of the actual module.

2.18  If the planned time of use of a modular or portable building in a single location is less than two 

years, the only practical heating technology may be electric resistance heating. In such cases, the 

notional building will use electric resistance heating.

2.19  If more than 70 of the external envelope of this type of building will be created from sub

assemblies manufactured before the date when this approved document came into force, the 

target primary energy rate and target emission rate should be multiplied by the relevant factors 

from Table 2.3.

NOTE: One way of demonstrating the date of manufacture of each subassembly is by relating the 

serial number to the manufacturers records.

Date of manufacture of 70 of modules 

making up the external envelope

Target primary energy rate 

multiplying factor

Target emission rate  

multiplying factor

After the coming into force date

6 April 2014  coming into force date

1 Oct 2010  5 April 2014

6 April 2006  30 Sept 2010

Pre 6 April 2006

Swimming pool basins

2.20 When calculating the building primary energy rate and building emission rate for a building 

with a swimming pool, the thermal performance of the pool basin should not be included in 

the calculation. Instead, the building primary energy rate and building emission rate should be 

calculated as if the area covered by the pool were replaced with the equivalent area of floor with 

the same Uvalue as the pool surround.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

R2427CTable 2.3  Target emission rate multiplying factor for modular and portable buildings with a planned service life of more than two years but intended time of use at a single location of less than two yearsShell and core developments

2.21  If a building is offered to the market as a shell for fitout work by the incoming occupier, the 

developer should calculate a designstage target primary energy rate, building primary energy rate, 

target emission rate and building emission rate. These calculations should be submitted to the 

building control body. The submission should demonstrate how the building could reasonably meet 

the energy efficiency requirements after fitout.

2.22 If some systems are not installed when a building is put on the market, reasonable assumptions 

should be made in the calculation of the building primary energy rate and building emission rate 

and model for the efficiencies of services that will be installed during first fitout work. The 

specification provided to the building control body should include all of the following.

a.  Details of the services, including any onsite electricity generation, not provided in the base build.

b.  The efficiency values assumed for these services.

c.  A statement on how access to install any services, including onsite electricity generation, will 

be provided during first fitout work. 

2.23 At practical completion of the base building in a shell and core development, the asbuilt target 

primary energy rate, building primary energy rate, target emission rate and building emission rate 

calculations should be based only on the building and systems as constructed; the fitout areas 

should be assumed to be conditioned to temperatures appropriate to their designated use, but no 

associated energy demand included.

2.24 If an incoming occupier does first fitout work on all or part of a building in a shell and core 

development by providing or extending fixed services for any of the following:

a.  heating

b.  hot water

c.  airconditioning

d.  mechanical ventilation 

then a target primary energy rate, building primary energy rate, target emission rate and building 

emission rate submission should be made to the building control body after completion to 

demonstrate compliance for the part of the building covered by the fitout work.

2.25 If fitout work does not include providing or extending any of the fixed services for any of the 

following:

a.  heating

b.  hot water

c.  airconditioning

d.  mechanical ventilation

then any lighting systems that are installed should be at least as efficient as those assumed in the 

shell developers initial submission.

NOTE: A new energy performance certificate is required for that part of the physical building 

covered by fitout work.

NOTE: Paragraph 9.12 outlines requirements for the building log book to be completed for shell and 

core developments when first fitout work takes place.

16  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R2427CIndustrial sites, workshops and nonresidential agricultural buildings other than 

those with low energy demand

2.26 Special considerations may apply for industrial sites, workshops and nonresidential agricultural 

buildings, where the National Calculation Methodology Modelling Guide cannot adequately account for 

the buildings use. For example, if using the National Calculation Methodology Modelling Guide would 

lead to negative impacts on costeffectiveness and/or significant technical risk. 

Buildings with low energy demand

2.27 Buildings with low energy demand are taken to be buildings or parts of buildings, which are not 

exempt from the energy efficiency requirements for reasons outlined in Section 0, where any of 

the following apply.

a.  Fixed building services for heating and/or cooling are not provided.

b.  Fixed building services for heating and/or cooling are provided only to heat or cool a localised 

area rather than the entire enclosed volume of the space concerned (e.g. localised radiant 

heaters at a workstation in a generally unheated space).

c.  Fixed building services are used to heat space in the building to temperatures that are 

substantially lower than those normally provided for human comfort (e.g. to protect a 

warehouse from frost).

2.28 A target primary energy rate, target emission rate, building primary energy rate and the building 

emission rate should be calculated for nonexempt buildings with low energy demand. Zones 

corresponding to the definitions in paragraph 2.27 should be modelled as outlined in the National 

Calculation Methodology Modelling Guide paragraph 124 as unconditioned, i.e. not served by a 

space heating or space cooling system.

2.29 For a building with low energy demand both of the following apply.

a.  Every fixed building service that is installed should meet the energy efficiency standards set out 

in Sections 5 and 6.

b.  The building envelope should be insulated to a degree that is reasonable in the particular case. If 

some general heating is provided, as in paragraph 2.27c, then no part of the opaque fabric should 

have a Uvalue worse than 0.7W/(m2K).

2.30 If part of a building with low energy demand is both:

a.  partitioned off 

b.  heated normally 

(for example, an office area in an unheated warehouse), then the separately heated area should be 

treated as a separate building or zone and the normal procedures for demonstrating compliance 

should be followed.

2.31  If a building with low energy demand subsequently changes to a building that no longer has a low 

energy demand, consequential improvements may need to be made in some circumstances. See 

Section 12.  

2.32 If a building or part of a building with low energy demand was designed as a shell and core 

building, and first fitout work is carried out which results in it no longer being classed as low 

energy demand (in line with paragraph 2.24), then normal procedures for demonstrating compliance 

should be followed.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

R2427CRegulation 25A: Consideration of high

efficiency alternative systems

This section deals with the requirements of regulation 25A of the Building Regulations 2010.

Regulation

Consideration of highefficiency alternative systems for new buildings

25A.  (1)   Before construction of a new building starts, the person who is to carry out the work must analyse and 

take into account the technical, environmental and economic feasibility of using highefficiency alternative 

systems (such as the following systems) in the construction, if available

(a)   decentralised energy supply systems based on energy from renewable sources;

(b)  cogeneration;

(c)   district or block heating or cooling, particularly where it is based entirely or partially on energy from 

renewable sources; and

(d)  heat pumps.

(2)  The person carrying out the work must

(a)   not later than the beginning of the day before the day on which the work starts, give the local authority 

a notice which states that the analysis referred to in paragraph (1)

(i)  has been undertaken;

(ii)  is documented; and

(iii) the documentation is available to the authority for verification purposes; and

(b)   ensure that a copy of the analysis is available for inspection at all reasonable times upon request by an 

officer of the local authority.

(3)   An authorised officer of the local authority may require production of the documentation in order to verify 

that this regulation has been complied with.

(4)  The analysis referred to in paragraph (1)

(a)   may be carried out for individual buildings or for groups of similar buildings or for common typologies 

of buildings in the same area; and

(b)   in so far as it relates to collective heating and cooling systems, may be carried out for all buildings 

connected to the system in the same area.

18  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R25A 

Regulation continued 

(5)  In this regulation

(a)   cogeneration means simultaneous generation in one process of thermal energy and one or both of the 

following

(i)  electrical energy;

(ii)  mechanical energy;

(b)   district or block heating or cooling means the distribution of thermal energy in the form of steam, hot 

water or chilled liquids, from a central source of production through a network of multiple buildings or 

sites, for the use of space or process heating or cooling;

(c)   energy from renewable sources means energy from renewable nonfossil sources, namely wind, solar, 

aerothermal, geothermal, hydrothermal and ocean energy, hydropower, biomass, landfill gas, sewage 

treatment plant gas and biogases; and

(d)   heat pump means a machine, a device or installation that transfers heat from natural surroundings such 

as air, water or ground to buildings or industrial applications by reversing the natural flow of heat such 

that it flows from a lower to a higher temperature. (For reversible heat pumps, it may also move heat 

from the building to the natural surroundings.)

NOTE: Where the building control body is an approved inspector, see regulation 20 of the Building 

(Approved Inspectors etc.) Regulations 2010 (as amended).

Intention

In the Secretary of States view, regulation 25A is met in a new building by analysing the feasibility of 

installing highefficiency alternative systems, following Section 3.

The Building Regulations do not require that highefficiency alternative systems or other low or zero 

carbon systems are installed. 

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

R25A 

Section 3: Consideration of highefficiency 

alternative systems

3.1  Before building work starts on a new nondomestic building, the person undertaking the building 

work must analyse the technical, environmental and economic feasibility of using highefficiency 

alternative systems in the building design. This analysis should be considered when designing the 

building.

3.2  The building control body should be notified that the analysis of highefficiency alternative 

systems has been undertaken, that it is documented and is available to be verified. The document 

should state whether highefficiency alternative systems have been included in the building design. 

The documented results of the analysis should be retained for the building control body to inspect 

upon request.

3.3  The analysis may be carried out for individual buildings, groups of similar buildings, or for common 

types of buildings in the same area. Where a number of buildings are connected to a district heat 

network or community heating system, a single analysis may be made for all buildings connected to 

the network or system. 

3.4  When a building undergoes a major renovation, the technical, environmental and economic 

feasibility of installing highefficiency alternative systems should be considered. 

20  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R25ARequirement L1(a): Limiting heat gains  

and losses

This section deals with the requirements of Part L1(a) of Schedule 1 to the Building Regulations 2010.

Limits on application

Requirement

Requirement

Schedule 1  Part L Conservation of fuel and power

 Reasonable provision shall be made for the 

conservation of fuel and power in buildings by 

(a)  limiting heat gains and losses

(i)   through thermal elements and other parts 

of the building fabric; and

(ii)   from pipes, ducts and vessels used for 

space heating, space cooling and hot water 

services; 

(b)  providing fixed building services which

(i)   are energy efficient to a reasonable standard;

(ii)  have effective controls; and

(iii)  are commissioned by testing and adjusting 

as necessary to ensure they use no more 

fuel and power than is reasonable in the 

circumstances.

Intention

In the Secretary of States view, requirement L1(a) is met in a new building by achieving both of the 

following. 

a.  Unwanted heat losses from the building are limited by meeting the standards for all of the 

following.

i.  The building fabric, including walls, floors, roof, windows and openings  paragraphs 4.1 to 

4.6 and paragraphs 4.9 to 4.14.

ii.  Airtightness  the required air permeability from Table 4.1.

iii.  The pipework and services  paragraphs 4.19 to 4.25.

b.  Unwanted heat gains to the building, throughout the year, through any of the routes listed 

in (a) above, are limited as set out in Section 4 and specifically for new buildings  paragraphs 

4.16 to 4.18.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

L1(a) 

In the Secretary of States view, requirement L1(a) is met for the work being done to an existing 

building by achieving both of the following, where relevant to the work being done.

a.  Unwanted heat losses from the building are limited by meeting the standards for all of the 

following.

i.  Any building fabric to which building work is being done, including walls, floors, roof, 

windows and openings  paragraphs 4.1 to 4.14. Further guidance is given in the following 

sections. 

 For new elements, replacement elements and extensions  Section 10.

 For renovated elements, retained elements, a change to energy status and a material 

change of use  Section 11.

ii.  Any work that may result in making airtightness worse  paragraph 4.15. 

iii.  Any pipework and services to which building work is being done  paragraphs 4.19 to 4.25.

b.  Unwanted heat gains to the building, throughout the year, through any of the routes listed in 

point (a) are limited as set out in Section 4.

NOTE: If work includes an extension to an existing building, initial provision of fixed building 

services, or an increase in the installed capacity of fixed building services, consequential 

improvements may be required  Section 12.

22  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

L1(a)Section 4: Limiting heat gains and losses

Uvalues 

4.1  Uvalues should be assessed using the methods and conventions set out in the Building Research 

Establishments BR 443. Uvalues should be assessed for the whole thermal element (e.g. in the case 

of a window, the combined performance of the glazing and the frame).

4.2  The Uvalue of a window should be assessed using one of the following methods.

a.  Calculated using the actual size and configuration of the window.

b.  For windows in buildings similar to dwellings, calculated for a standard window 1.23m (25) 

wide  1.48m (25) high and the actual configuration of the window.

c.  For windows in buildings similar to dwellings, calculated for a standard window 1.23m (25)  

wide  1.48m (25) high and one of the following standard configurations. Standard 

configurations should not be used for commercial windows.

i.  For a casement window, a central vertical divider with one opening light and one fixed light.

ii.  For a vertical sliding sash window, a central horizontal divider with two opening lights.

iii.  For a roof window, no divider.

d.  Measured using the hotbox method as set out in BS EN ISO 125671 for windows and  

BS EN ISO 125672 for roof windows.

NOTE: For domestictype window construction, to be used in buildings similar to dwellings (see 

Table 4.1), the default value from the Standard Assessment Procedure (Table 6e) may be used if 

there are no test data or calculated performance values.

4.3  The Uvalue of a door should be assessed using one of the following methods.

a.  Calculated using the actual size and configuration of the door.

b.  Calculated using one of the following standard sizes. 

1.23m (25) wide  2.18m (25) high, for doors  3.6 m.

ii.  2.00m (25) wide  2.18m (25) high, for doors  3.6 m.

NOTE: When a single Uvalue is calculated for a product range of doors, the configuration of the 

door chosen for the calculation should be the worst performing in the product range.

c.  Measured using the hotbox method as set out in BS EN ISO 125671.

4.4  To correctly assess whether an element meets the limiting Uvalue, the Uvalue must be calculated 

for the element in the appropriate plane  either horizontal or vertical. For windows and roof 

windows, Uvalues should be calculated based on a vertical position. For rooflights, Uvalues should be 

calculated based on a horizontal position. If the data available for the element is in the incorrect plane, 

it should be adjusted according to the guidance in the Building Research Establishments BR 443.

NOTE: These orientations should only be used when calculating Uvalues to check that they meet 

the limiting standards outlined in paragraphs 4.5 to 4.8 below. They should not be used in the 

energy calculations in Sections 1 and 2, where the Uvalue of each element is calculated based on 

the plane in which it is constructed or installed.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

L1(a)Limiting standards for new or replacement elements

4.5  New fabric elements should meet the limiting standards in Table 4.1. This includes all of the following.

a.  Elements in new buildings.

b.  New elements in extensions to existing buildings. 

c.  New or replacement elements in existing buildings. 

Guidance on when a new or replacement element in an existing building must meet the requirements 

in this table is given in Section 10.

4.6  If windows or fully glazed pedestrian doors cannot meet the requirements of Table 4.1 in an 

existing building because of the need to maintain the character of the building, either of the 

following should be met. 

a.  These fittings should not exceed a centre pane Uvalue of 1.2W/(m2K).

b.  Single glazing should be supplemented with lowemissivity secondary glazing.

24  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

L1(a)Element type

Roof (flat roof)(2)

Roof (pitched roof)(2)

Wall(2)(3)

Floor(4)(5)

Swimming pool basin(6)

Maximum Uvalue(1) W/(m2K) or air permeability

0.18 

0.16 

0.26 

0.18 

0.25 

Windows in buildings similar to dwellings(7)(8)

1.6 or Window Energy Rating(9) Band B 

All other windows,(8)(10)(11) roof windows, curtain walling 

Rooflights(12)(13)

Pedestrian doors (including glazed doors)(14)

Vehicle access and similar large doors

Highusage entrance doors

Roof ventilators (including smoke vents)

Air permeability (for new buildings)

8.0m3/(hm2)  50Pa

NOTES:

1.  Areaweighted average values, except for new windows, rooflights and doors in existing buildings. 

2.  For dormer windows, roof includes the roof parts of the windows and wall includes the wall parts (cheeks).

If meeting such a standard in an existing building would reduce by more than 5 the internal floor area of the 

room bounded by the wall, a lesser provision may be appropriate. 

4.  The Uvalue of the floor of an extension may be calculated using the exposed perimeter and floor area of either 

the whole enlarged building or the extension alone.

If meeting such a standard in an existing building, would create significant problems in relation to adjoining floor 

levels, a lesser provision may be appropriate.

6.  The Uvalue of a swimming pool basin (walls and floor) calculated according to BS EN ISO 13370.

7.  For example, student accommodation, care homes and similar uses where the occupancy levels and internal heat 

gains are essentially domestic in character.

If other performance (e.g. wind load, safety, security or acoustic attenuation) requires thicker glass to be used, an 

equivalent window unit with standard thickness glazing should be shown to meet the required standard. 

9.  The methods for calculating Window Energy Rating are set out in the Glass and Glazing Federations  

Glazing Manual Data Sheet 2.3, Guide to the Calculation of Energy Ratings for Windows, Roof Windows and 

Doors. 

10.  No maximum Uvalue is set for display windows and similar glazing. There are no limits on the design of display 

windows and similar glazing, but for new buildings their impact must be taken into account in the calculation of 

primary energy and CO2 emissions.

11.  In buildings with high internal heat gains, the average Uvalue for windows can be relaxed from the values given 

above if this can be shown to be an appropriate way of reducing overall CO2 emissions and primary energy. 

However, values should be no higher than 2.7W/(m2K).

12.  Uvalues for rooflights or rooflightandkerb assemblies should be based on the developed surface area of the 

rooflight (Ud values), which is often greater than the area of the roof opening. Further guidance on Udvalues is 

given in the Building Research Establishments BR 443 and the National Association of Rooflight Manufacturers 

Technical Document NTD02.

13.  The limiting value for rooflights also applies to kerbs that are supplied as part of a single rooflightandkerb 

assembly sourced from the same supplier and for which the supplier can provide a combined Udvalue for the 

assembly. An upstand built on site should have a maximum Uvalue of 0.35W/m2K.

14.  For external fire doorsets, as defined in Appendix A of Approved Document B, Volume 2, in new and existing non

domestic buildings, a maximum Uvalue of 1.8W/(m2K) is permissible.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

L1(a)Table 4.1  Limiting Uvalues for new or replacement elements in new and existing buildings and air permeability in new buildingsLimiting standards for renovated and retained elements

4.7  Existing elements that are being renovated should meet the limiting standards in Table 4.2. 

Guidance on when an existing element should meet the standards in Table 4.2 is given in Section 11. 

Elements that should meet the standards include both of the following. 

a.  Thermal elements being renovated in existing buildings. Renovated elements should achieve the 

Uvalues in Table 4.2, column (b).

b.  Elements being retained in existing buildings, for example following a material change of use or 

change to energy status (see Section 11). Retained elements with a Uvalue that is higher than the 

threshold value in Table 4.2, column (a), should be upgraded to achieve the Uvalues in Table 4.2, 

column (b). 

4.8  If achieving the Uvalue in Table 4.2, column (b) either: 

is not technically or functionally feasible or

b.  would not achieve a simple payback of 15 years or less 

then the element should be upgraded to the lowest Uvalue that both:

is technically and functionally feasible and

b.  can achieve a simple payback not exceeding 15 years. 

Generally, a thermal element once upgraded should not have a Uvalue greater than 0.7W/(m2K). A 

lesser standard for the thermal element may be acceptable where work complies with Part C of the 

Building Regulations on protection from the harmful effects of interstitial and surface condensation. 

26  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

L1(a)Element

Uvalue(1) W/(m2K)

(a) Threshold

(b) Improved

Pitched roof  insulation at ceiling level(2)

Pitched roof  insulation at rafter level(2)(3)

Flat roof or roof with integral insulation(2)(4)

Wall  cavity insulation(2)(5)

Wall  external or internal insulation(2)(6)

Floors(7)(8)

NOTES:

1.  Areaweighted average values.

2.  For dormer windows, roof includes the roof parts of the window and wall includes the wall parts (cheeks). 

If meeting such a standard would limit head room, a lesser standard may be appropriate. In such cases, both of 

the following should be achieved.

a.  The depth of the insulation plus any required air gap should be at least to the depth of the rafters.

b.  The insulant should be chosen to achieve the lowest practicable Uvalue.

If there are problems with the loadbearing capacity of the frame or height of the upstand, for a flat roof or roof 

with integral insulation, a lesser standard may be appropriate. 

5.  This applies only to a wall suitable for cavity insulation. Where this is not the case, it should be treated as wall  

external or internal insulation.

If meeting such a standard would reduce the internal floor area of the room bounded by the wall by more than 5, 

a lesser standard may be appropriate.

7.  The Uvalue of the floor of an extension may be calculated using the exposed perimeter and floor area of either 

the whole enlarged building or the extension alone.

If meeting such a standard would create significant problems in relation to adjoining floor levels, a lesser standard 

may be appropriate.

Continuity of insulation 

In new and existing buildings both of the following should apply.

a.  The insulation should be reasonably continuous across newly built elements. 

b.  Thermal bridging, including at the party wall, should be reasonably limited. 

NOTE: Any solution to edge sealing or thermal bridging in new buildings should take particular 

account of Part E of the Building Regulations.

4.10  To avoid air movement within thermal elements in new and existing buildings, either of the 

following measures should be implemented.

a.  The insulation layer should abut the air barrier at all points across newly built elements.

b.  The space between the air barrier and the insulation layer should be filled with solid material.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

L1(a)Table 4.2  Limiting Uvalues for existing elements in existing buildings 

4.11  Thermal bridging should be addressed in the design and construction of a building by either of the 

following means.

a.  Using construction joint details calculated by a person with suitable expertise and experience, 

which can then be used in the building primary energy rate and building emission rate 

calculations. Construction joint details should be calculated using both of the following. 

i.  The guidance set out in the Building Research Establishments BR 497.

ii.  A process flow sequence that has been provided to the building control body indicating the 

way in which the detail should be constructed. 

NOTE: Evidence of suitable expertise and experience for calculating linear thermal transmittance 

would be to demonstrate that the person has been trained in the software used to carry out 

the calculation, has applied that model to the example calculations in the Building Research 

Establishments BR 497 and has achieved results within the stated tolerances. 

b.  Using construction joints with no specific quantification of the thermal bridge values. In such 

cases, the generic linear thermal bridge values given in the Building Research Establishments 

Information Paper 1/06 and increased by 0.04W/(mK) or 50, whichever is greater, should be 

used in the building primary energy rate and building emission rate calculation.

4.12  To calculate linear thermal transmittances and temperature factors in support of the approaches 

in paragraph 4.11a, follow the guidance in the Building Research Establishments BR 497. Specified 

construction details should achieve a temperature factor that is no worse than the performance set 

out in the Building Research Establishments Information Paper 1/06. 

4.13  To support the approaches in paragraph 4.11a, it should be demonstrated to the building control 

body that an appropriate system of site inspection is in place to give confidence that the 

construction procedures achieve the required standards.

4.14  When thermal elements are replaced or renovated, a report should be produced, signed by a 

suitably qualified person, which confirms all of the following.

a.  Appropriate design details and building techniques have been specified.

b.  The specified details, as constructed, provide adequate protection against surface condensation 

using the guidance in the Building Research Establishments Information Paper 1/06 and BR 497.

Airtightness in existing buildings

4.15  When carrying out work in existing buildings, care should be taken to reduce unwanted heat loss 

through air infiltration by doing all of the following. 

a.  When installing pipework or services, taping and sealing around openings and service 

penetrations.

b.  When installing or renovating thermal elements, the element being installed should be draught

proofed and airleakage gaps should be filled.

c.  When installing controlled fittings, the controlled fitting should be well fitted and reasonably 

draughtproof.

NOTE: Particular attention should be paid to guidance in Approved Document F and Approved 

Document J when making an existing building more airtight. 

28  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

L1(a)Limiting the effects of solar gains in summer

4.16  In new residential buildings, as defined in Table 0.1 of Approved Document O, solar gains should be 

limited in summer in accordance with the guidance in Approved Document O.

4.17  The guidance in paragraph 4.18 applies to all other buildings not covered in paragraph 4.16, 

irrespective of whether they are airconditioned. 

The intention is to limit solar gains during the summer, in order to either:

a.  reduce the need for airconditioning

b.  reduce the capacity of any airconditioning system that is installed.

4.18  For each space in the building that is occupied or mechanically cooled, the solar gains through 

the glazing  aggregated from April to September inclusive  should be no greater than would 

occur through the relevant reference glazing systems in Table 4.3 with a defined total solar energy 

transmittance (gvalue) calculated according to BS EN 410. In this context, an occupied space means 

a space that is intended to be occupied by the same person for a substantial part of the day. This 

excludes circulation spaces and other areas of transient occupancy, such as toilets.

Type of space (as 

defined in the 

National Calculation 

Methodology)

Sidelit

Toplit

Average zone 

height

Glazing location 

for reference 

space

Glazing area for 

reference space

Framing 

factor for 

reference 

space

Glazing 

gvalue for 

reference 

space

Eastfacing 

faade

Fullwidth to a 

height of 1000mm

10 of roof area(1)

10 of roof area(1)

NOTE:

Roof area determined from the inside of the space looking out.

Limiting heat losses and gains from building services 

Direct hot water and heating pipework

4.19  Hot water pipework should be insulated in all areas inside and outside the building unless it can be 

demonstrated that the heat is always useful. 

4.20 Insulation should be designed so that the permissible heat losses in BS 5422 for hot water services 

in nondomestic buildings are not exceeded. Meeting the standards in Table 4.4 is one way of 

demonstrating that this has been achieved for low temperature systems.

4.21  Insulation thickness should be calculated in accordance with BS EN ISO 12241.

NOTE: in most cases, manufacturers will be able to supply information and thicknesses for their 

specific products. However, Tables 4.4 and 4.5 give indicative thicknesses for typical applications.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

L1(a)Table 4.3  Reference glazing systems for solar gain calculation 

Nominal internal pipe  

diameter (mm)

Minimum insulation thickness (mm) for low temperature  

hot water systems(1)(2)(3)

Thermal conductivity ()  

0.025W/mK

Thermal conductivity ()  

0.04W/mK

Less than or equal to 10

Less than or equal to 15

Less than or equal to 25

Less than or equal to 32

Less than or equal to 40

Less than or equal to 80

Less than or equal to 100

NOTES:

1.   Thicknesses apply for lowemissivity faced insulation.

3.  For other circumstances refer to BS 5422.

Insulation thicknesses designed to achieve permissible heat losses from BS 5422 for heating systems 95C.

Nominal internal pipe  

diameter (mm)

Minimum insulation thickness (mm) for domestic  

hot water services(1)(2)(3)

Thermal conductivity ()  

0.025W/mK

Thermal conductivity ()  

0.04W/mK

Less than or equal to 10

Less than or equal to 20

Less than or equal to 40

Less than or equal to 80

Less than or equal to 100

Insulation thicknesses designed to achieve permissible heat losses from BS 5422 for hot water services at 60C.

NOTES:

2.  Thicknesses for lowemissivity faced insulation. 

3.  For other circumstances refer to BS 5422.

30  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

L1(a)Table 4.4  Minimum thickness of pipework insulation for low temperature hot water space heating applications in nondomestic buildingsTable 4.5  Minimum thickness of pipework insulation for domestic hot water services in nondomestic buildingsCooling pipework

4.22 Cooling pipework should be insulated along its whole length. Control should be maximised and heat 

gain to uninsulated pipes should only be permitted where the proportion of the cooling load relating 

to distribution pipework is less than 1 of the total load.

4.23 Insulation should be designed so that the maximum permissible heat gains in Table 10 of BS 5422 are 

not exceeded.

4.24 Provision should also be made for control of condensation by following the Thermal Insulation 

Manufacturers and Suppliers Associations HVAC Guidance for Achieving Compliance with Part L of 

the Building Regulations. 

Insulating ductwork

4.25 Ductwork that carries warm or cold air should be insulated throughout its whole length to achieve 

heat transfer no greater than that given in Table 4.6. Table 4.6 also gives indicative insulation 

thicknesses, which offers one way of demonstrating that the heat transfer value has not been 

exceeded.  

Condensation should also be controlled by following the Thermal Insulation Manufacturers and 

Suppliers Associations HVAC Guidance for Achieving Compliance with Part L of the Building 

Regulations.

Heating duct(1a)

Cooling or dualpurpose duct(1b)

Heat transfer (W/m2)

Indicative insulation thickness (mm)(2)

16.34

6.45

NOTES:

Insulation thicknesses should be calculated according to BS EN ISO 12241 using the following standardised 

assumptions. 

a.   Horizontal duct at 35C, with 600mm vertical sidewall in still air at 15C.

b.   Horizontal duct at 13C, with 600mm vertical sidewall in still air at 25C. 

2.   Thicknesses apply for lowemissivity faced insulation with a thermal conductivity of 0.025W/(mK) or better. 

Otherwise consult BS 5422.

Domestic hot water

4.26 Domestic hot water storage vessels should meet either of the following. 

a.  Maximum heat losses in Table 4.7.

b.  Maintenance consumption values in BS EN 89.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

L1(a)Table 4.6  Maximum heat losses and gains for ducts delivering air for heating and/or coolingNominal volume (litres)

Heat loss (kWh/24h)

Nominal volume (litres)

Heat loss (kWh/24h)

NOTES:

1.   For maximum heat losses from vessels with a storage volume less than 200 litres, see BS EN 15450.

2.   The heat loss from electricallyheated cylinders (volume V litres) should not exceed either of the following.

a.   Pointofuse: 1.28  (0.2  0.051V2/3).

b.   Local: 1.28  (0.051V2/3).

32  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

L1(a)Table 4.7  Maximum heat losses from domestic hot water storage vessels(1)(2)Requirements L1(b)(i), (ii) and L2: Fixed building 

services energy efficiency and controls and 

onsite generation of electricity

This section deals with the requirements of Part L1(b)(i), (ii) and L2 of Schedule 1 to the Building 

Regulations 2010.

Limits on application

Requirement

Requirement

Schedule 1  Part L Conservation of fuel and power

 Reasonable provision shall be made for the 

conservation of fuel and power in buildings by 

  (a)  limiting heat gains and losses

(i)   through thermal elements and other parts of 

the building fabric; and

(ii)   from pipes, ducts and vessels used for 

space heating, space cooling and hot water 

services; 

  (b) providing fixed building services which

(i)   are energy efficient to a reasonable 

standard;

(ii)  have effective controls; and

(iii)  are commissioned by testing and adjusting 

as necessary to ensure they use no more 

fuel and power than is reasonable in the 

circumstances.

Onsite generation of electricity

L2.  Where a system for onsite electricity generation is 

installed

(a)   reasonable provision must be made to ensure 

that

(i)   the system and its electrical output are 

appropriately sized for the site and available 

infrastructure;

(ii)   the system has effective controls; and

(b)   it must be commissioned by testing and 

adjusting as necessary to ensure that it produces 

the maximum electricity that is reasonable in 

the circumstances.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

L1(b), L2 

Intention

In the Secretary of States view, requirements L1(b)(i), (ii) and L2 are met in a new building by achieving 

all of the following.

a.  Fixed building service that meet the minimum efficiencies in Section 6 are provided.

b.  Controls to fixed building services are provided that both: 

i.  meet the general controls for heating systems in paragraphs 5.11, 5.12 and 5.14 to 5.16 

ii.  meet the system specific controls in Section 6. 

c.  Any onsite electricity generation is both appropriately sized and has controls.

In the Secretary of States view, requirements L1(b)(i), (ii) and L2 are met in existing buildings by 

achieving all of the following.

a.  Any fixed building services installed meet the minimum efficiencies in Section 6 and the criteria 

in paragraph 5.4.

b.  Any fixed building services installed have controls that both: 

i.  meet the standards for general controls for heating systems in paragraphs 5.6, 5.11, 5.12 and 

5.14 to 5.16

ii.  meet the standards for system specific controls in Section 6.

c.  Any onsite electricity generation is both appropriately sized and has controls.

34  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

L1(b), L2Section 5: Minimum building services 

efficiencies and controls  general guidance

New building services 

5.1  For each new fixed building service in a new or existing building, the efficiency of the service 

should be no lower than the value set out in Section 6. If a proposed service is not covered in 

Section 6, the service should be shown to be no less efficient than a comparable service that is 

covered.

5.2  Both of the following apply to the efficiency claimed for a fixed building service. 

a.  The efficiency should be based on the appropriate test standard set out in Section 5 or Section 6.

b.  The test data should be certified by a notified body. 

5.3  For heating and cooling systems, paragraphs 5.9 to 5.17 should be followed, in addition to system 

specific advice in Section 6. 

Replacement building services in existing buildings 

5.4  A replacement fixed building service should be at least as efficient as the value set out in Section 6 

and should comply with either of the following. 

a.  Use the same fuel as the service being replaced and have an efficiency that is not worse than 

that of the service being replaced.

b.  Use a different fuel than the service being replaced. The system should both: 

i.  not produce more CO2 emissions per kWh of heat than the appliance being replaced

ii.  not have a higher primary energy demand per kWh of heat than the appliance being replaced. 

Worked example 

Replacing an old oilfired boiler with emissions of 0.298kgCO2/kWh and primary energy of 

1.180kWhPE/kWh at 85 efficiency with an LPG boiler with emissions of 0.241kgCO2/kWh and primary 

energy of 1.141kWhPE/kWh at 93 efficiency. 

CO2 emissions

  Oilfired boiler: 

  LPG boiler: 

Primary energy 

  Oilfired boiler: 

  LPG boiler: 

0.298/0.85  0.35kgCO2/kWh 

0.241/0.93  0.26kgCO2/kWh 

1.180/0.85 1.39kWhPE/kWh

1.141/0.93  1.23kWhPE/kWh 

The new LPG boiler has both lower CO2 emissions and primary energy than the oilfired boiler being 

replaced, and therefore complies. It is also at least as efficient as the minimum efficiency as set out in 

Section 6 of this guidance.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

L1(b), L2 

NOTE: For gridsupplied electricity, a CO2 emission factor of 0.136kgCO2/kWh and primary energy 

factor of 1.501kWhPE/kWh should be used. All other CO2 emission factors and primary energy 

factors should be taken from Table 29 (or Table 32 for district heat networks) of the National 

Calculation Methodology Modelling Guide.

NOTE: Where the efficiency of the appliance being replaced is unknown, this should be established 

in line with the hierarchy outlined in Appendix E.

If renewable technology such as a wind turbine or photovoltaic array is being replaced, the new 

system should have an electrical output that is at least the same as that of the original installation.

5.6  When installing a new heating appliance in an existing building, the heating system after the work is 

complete should have the following controls.

a.  Timing.

b.  Temperature.

c.  Where appropriate and technically feasible, weather compensation.

5.7  For heating systems that are being replaced, paragraphs 5.9 to 5.12 should be followed in addition 

to system specific guidance in Section 6. Facilitating future connection to any local district heat 

networks should be considered (e.g. providing capped off connections in pipework to allow later 

connection to a district heat network). 

5.8  If work involves providing or extending fixed building services, energy meters should be installed 

following paragraph 5.17, and consequential improvements may apply (see Section 12). 

Sizing new and replacement space heating systems

5.9  The specification of space heating systems should be based on an appropriate heat loss calculation 

for the building, based on BS EN 128311 and CIBSEs Guide B1. Systems should not be significantly 

oversized.

5.10  Where a wet heating system is either:

a.  newly installed

b.  fully replaced in an existing building, including the heating appliance, emitters and associated 

pipework 

all parts of the system, including pipework and emitters, should be sized to allow the space heating 

system to operate effectively, and in a manner that meets the heating needs of the building, at a 

maximum flow temperature of 55C or lower. To maximise the efficiency of these systems, it would be 

preferable to design to a lower flow temperature than 55C. 

Where it is not feasible to install a space heating system that can operate at this temperature (e.g. 

where there is insufficient space for larger radiators, or the existing distribution system is provided 

with higher temperature heat from a low carbon district heat network), the space heating system 

should be designed to the lowest design temperature possible that will still meet the heating needs 

of the building. 

36  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

L1(b), L2Controls and zoning for new and replacement space heating 

systems

5.11  Heating systems should have all the following controls.

a.  The systems should be subdivided into separate control zones for areas of the building in which 

any of the following are significantly different. 

i.  Solar exposure.

ii.  Pattern of use. 

iii.  Type of use.

b.  For each control zone it should be possible to control both of the following independently of 

other control zones.

i.  Timing.

ii.  Temperature. 

c.  The service should be appropriate to the requirements of the space. If both heating and cooling 

are provided, the controls should prevent them operating simultaneously.

d.  Central plant should operate only when the zone systems require it. The default condition 

should be off.

e.  Where appropriate and technically feasible, heating systems should have weather compensation.

5.12  System controls should be wired so that when there is no demand for space heating, the heating 

appliance and pump are switched off.

System treatment for hot water systems for space and 

domestic hot water heating

5.13  Before a new heating appliance is installed, all central heating and primary hot water circuits 

should be thoroughly cleaned and flushed out. A suitable chemical inhibitor should be added to 

the primary heating circuit to protect against scale and corrosion. In hard water areas, suitable 

measures should be taken to treat the feed water to water heaters and the hot water circuit of 

combination boilers to reduce limescale accumulation. 

Thermostatic room controls 

5.14  For heating and cooling systems in a new nondomestic building, or when a heat generator such 

as a boiler is replaced in an existing nondomestic building, each room should be provided with 

thermostatic room controls. These should be capable of being used to separately adapt the heating 

or cooling output in each room served by the heating or cooling appliance. Where justified in 

accordance with paragraph 5.15, heating and cooling may be controlled for each heating zone rather 

than individual rooms.

NOTE: There is no need to install thermostatic room controls in rooms/zones without heating or 

cooling in new and existing nondomestic buildings.

NOTE: Installing thermostatic room controls may not be technically feasible in some cases. These 

may include the following.

a.  Buildings with very low heat demand (e.g. less than 10W/m2).

b.  Buildings with buffer zones for heat absorption or dissipation with high thermal mass.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

L1(b), L25.15  It may be justified to control a heating zone rather than individual rooms in either of the following 

cases.

In openplan spaces in which heating demand and patterns of use are similar across the whole 

space, subzoning of temperature control might not be appropriate. In such cases, the space 

should be considered as a single heating zone.

b.  Where two adjacent rooms have a similar function and heating or cooling requirements (e.g. 

kitchen and utility room). In such cases, the adjacent rooms should be considered as a single 

heating zone. 

NOTE: Exhaust air heat pump systems, which extract heat from the exhaust air of a building, may 

not need to provide independent thermostatic control to individual rooms. Providing room/

zone control on this type of system is unlikely to be economically and/or technically viable. 

However, other space heating systems also in use in the same building should be controlled using 

thermostatic room controls as described above.

5.16  The standards in paragraphs 5.14 and 5.15 may be satisfied by providing any of the following.

a.  Both of the following.

i.  A thermostat in a room that the heating or cooling circuit serves.

ii.  An individual thermostatic room control for each emitter, such as a thermostatic radiator 

valve, on all emitters outside the room that contains the thermostat. Thermostatic radiator 

valves should not be used in the same room as the thermostat.

b.  An individual room/heating zone thermostat or fan coil thermostat for each room or heating 

zone.

c.  An individual networked heating or cooling emitter control for each emitter.

Energy submeters

5.17  Energy submetering systems should be installed in new buildings, or when fixed building services 

are provided or extended in an existing building, and should meet all of the following requirements.

a.  The various enduse categories, such as heating, lighting and cooling, should be submetered in 

such a way that at least 90 of the annual energy consumption of each fuel can be assigned to 

an enduse. Detailed guidance on how to achieve this is given in CIBSEs TM39.

b.  Metering should enable the comparison of forecast energy use and inperformance energy and 

facilitate energy reporting. This can be demonstrated by basing the submetering strategy on a 

designstage energy forecast for the building, using one of the methodologies in paragraph 9.4.

c.  Metering should allow the energy use of different tenants within the building to be separately 

monitored.

d.  The outputs of any renewable systems should be separately monitored.

In buildings with a total useful floor area greater than 1000m2, automatic meter reading and data 

collection facilities should be installed.

38  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

L1(b), L2Section 6: System specific guidance

NOTE: This section sets out minimum Building Regulations standards for fixed building services and 

other systems. Best practice is to achieve higher efficiencies than these minimum standards.

NOTE: The Ecodesign for EnergyRelated Products Regulations 2010 set the efficiencies and 

standards that must be met when introducing new energyusing products to the market. This 

approved document sets standards that should be met when installing fixed building services or 

onsite electricity generation. In cases where the EnergyRelated Products Regulations and the 

Building Regulations both apply, both standards should be met.

6.1  This section sets out minimum standards for specific types of building services. The minimum 

efficiencies set out are based on documented manufacturers test data. Note that test results will 

always be based on the equipments operation under particular conditions. Equipment should be 

designed, specified and installed with the aim of maximising its efficiency asinstalled.

Boilers

NOTE: This subsection applies to wet central heating systems that use commercial boilers fired by 

natural gas, liquid petroleum gas, oil or biomass. Steam boilers are not covered. Electric boilers are 

dealt with in a separate subsection.

6.2  In addition to meeting the general requirements for heating systems in Section 5 and following 

paragraphs 6.7 and 6.8, a boiler should meet either of the following. 

a.  For new buildings, the seasonal efficiencies in Table 6.1. 

b.  For boiler plant installed in existing buildings, the seasonal efficiencies, or the overall seasonal 

efficiency for multipleboiler systems using nonidentical boilers, in Table 6.2. 

Fuel type

Natural gas

System

Boiler seasonal efficiency (gross calorific value)

Singleboiler 2MW output

Singleboiler 2MW output

Multipleboiler

88 for any individual boiler

93 for overall multiboiler system

NOTE:

1.   Seasonal efficiencies should be calculated in line with paragraphs 6.3 to 6.6.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

L1(b), L2Table 6.1  Minimum heat generator seasonal efficiency for boiler systems in new  buildings(1)Fuel type

Natural gas

System

Boiler seasonal efficiency (gross calorific value)

Singleboiler 400kW output

Singleboiler 401kW2MW output

Singleboiler 2MW output

Multipleboiler

84 for any individual boiler

91 for overall multiboiler system

Singleboiler 2MW output

Singleboiler 2MW output

Multipleboiler

Singleboiler

Multipleboiler

88 for any individual boiler

93 for overall multiboiler system

88 for any individual boiler

93 for overall multiboiler system

NOTES:

1.  Seasonal efficiencies should be calculated in line with paragraphs 6.3 to 6.6. 

2.  Noncondensing boilers should be fitted with a flue condensing kit where feasible and where the boiler is likely 

to be able to operate in condensing mode (e.g. variable temperature circuits).

Singleboiler systems and multipleboiler systems with identical boilers

6.3  The seasonal efficiency of the boiler should be determined using equation 6.1. 

boiler seasonal efficiency  0.8130  0.19100 

Where:

equation 6.1

30 is the gross boiler efficiency measured at 30 load

100 is the gross boiler efficiency measured at 100 load.

NOTE: Efficiencies based on net calorific value should be converted to efficiencies based on gross 

calorific value, using the appropriate conversion factor in the Standard Assessment Procedure 

version 10 Table E4. Equation 6.1 assumes that the efficiency at 15 load is the same as that at 30 

load.

6.4  Equation 6.1 applies to both of the following. 

a.  Singleboiler systems that: 

i.  produce low temperature hot water

ii.  have an output of less than or equal to 400kW.

 Multipleboiler systems that: 

i.  produce low temperature hot water

ii.  comprise individual boilers with identical efficiencies

iii.  have an output of less than or equal to 400kW.

40  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

L1(b), L2Table 6.2  Minimum heat generator seasonal efficiency for boiler systems in existing buildings(1)(2)NOTE: For boilers with an output of more than 400kW, the manufacturers declared efficiencies 

should be used.

Multipleboiler systems in new buildings

6.5  For multiple boilers in new buildings, the fourstep method described below should be used to 

calculate the overall boiler seasonal efficiency.

a.  Step 1: Determine the load on each boiler for each of the three system part load conditions of 

15, 30 and 100.

NOTE: For example, if the total system output is made up of three equally sized boilers, at 15 

of system output the lead boiler will be operating at 45 of its rated output with the other two 

boilers switched off.

b.  Step 2: Determine the efficiency of each boiler for the above operating conditions.

NOTE: Linear interpolation should be used to determine efficiencies between manufacturers 

declared efficiencies at 30 and 100 load. If efficiencies at below 30 are required and 

unavailable, the boiler efficiency may be taken as equal to that at 30 load.

c.  Step 3: Calculate the overall operating efficiency at each system part load condition using 

equation 6.2.

p  Qp/(qb,p/b,p) 

Where:

equation 6.2

p is the system efficiency at part load condition p, i.e. 15, 30 and 100 of system rated output

Qp is the system heat output at part load condition p

qb,p is the individual boiler heat output at system part load condition p

b,p is the individual boiler efficiency at system part load condition p.

d.  Step 4: Calculate the overall boiler seasonal efficiency (OBSE) as the weighted average of the 

efficiencies at the three load conditions, using equation 6.3.

OBSE  0.3615  0.4530  0.19100 

equation 6.3

Multipleboiler systems with nonidentical boilers replacing existing systems

6.6  In existing systems, equation 6.4 should be used to calculate the overall boiler seasonal efficiency if 

both of the following apply. 

a.  More than one boiler is installed on the same heating system. 

b.  The efficiencies of the boilers are not identical. 

NOTE: All boilers should be used in the calculation, including any that are identical.

(BSE  R)

OBSE

Where:

equation 6.4

OBSE is the gross overall boiler seasonal efficiency  an average, weighted by boiler output, of the 

individual seasonal boiler efficiencies

BSE is the gross boiler seasonal efficiency of each individual boiler calculated using equation 6.1

R is the rated output in kW of each individual boiler (at 80/60C flow/return temperature).

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

L1(b), L2Boiler controls

6.7  Boiler systems with an output of more than 100kW should have both of the following.

a.  Optimum start/stop control with either: 

i.  night setback 

ii.  frost protection outside occupied periods. 

b.  Either:

twostage high/low firing facility in boiler

ii.  multiple boilers with sequence control to provide efficient partload performance.

6.8  Gasfired boilers and multistage oilfired boilers with an output of more than 500kW should have 

fully modulating burner controls.

Biomass boilers

6.9  The efficiency of biomass boilers at their nominal load and tested to BS EN 12809 should be no lower 

than the following.

a.  For independent gravityfed boilers of 20.5kW output: 65.

b.  For independent automatic pellet/woodchip boilers: 75.

Gas and oilfired warm air heaters

6.10  In addition to meeting the general requirements for heating systems in Section 5, warm air systems 

in new and existing buildings should meet the heat generator seasonal efficiency in Table 6.3.

Warm air heater type

Heat generator seasonal efficiency 

(net calorific value/thermal efficiency)

Product standard

Gasfired forced convection to 

assist transportation of combustion 

air and/or combustion products

Direct gasfired forced convection(1)

Oilfired forced convection

BS EN 621 for unfanned appliances

BS EN 1020 for fanned appliances

BS EN 525

BS EN 13842

NOTE:

1.  For direct gasfired forced convection air heaters, 100 of the net heat input is delivered to the space. Specific 

ventilation requirements as defined in BS EN 525 should be met. 

Gas and oilfired radiant heaters 

6.11  In addition to meeting the general requirements for heating systems in Section 5, radiant heaters in 

new and existing buildings should meet the heat generator seasonal efficiency in Table 6.4.

6.12  For flued appliances, thermal efficiency should be measured to either of the following test 

standards, as applicable: 

a.  BS EN 1020 

42  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

L1(b), L2Table 6.3  Minimum heat generator seasonal efficiency for gas and oilfired warm air heatersb.  BS EN 13842.

The calculation of the thermal efficiency (net calorific value) should both:

a.  exclude fans 

b.  take account of the radiant heater and associated flue pipe/tailpipe within the building 

envelope.

Appliance type

Luminous radiant heater  unflued

Nonluminous radiant heater  unflued

Nonluminous radiant heater  flued

Multiburner radiant heater

Heat generator efficiency (net calorific value)

Thermal

Radiant

Electric space heating systems

NOTE: Electric resistance heating is assumed to be 100 efficient, therefore no minimum efficiency 

is set for these types of system. 

NOTE:  This section of the guidance does not cover either of the following.

a.  Electric heat pumps (guidance is provided in paragraphs 6.44 to 6.46).

b.  Portable electric heating devices.

6.13  Electric space heating systems should meet the guidance in paragraphs 6.14 to 6.19, in addition to 

the general requirements for heating systems in Section 5. 

6.14  Electric boiler systems should comply with all of the following.

a.  Systems should both:

i.  have flow temperature control 

ii.  be capable of modulating the power input to the primary water depending on space 

heating conditions. 

b.  Timing and temperature demand control should be provided. 

If the building has a floor area greater than 150m2, heating should be split into different heating 

zones and each zone should have separate controls for timing and temperature demand. 

6.15  Electric warm air systems should comply with both of the following. 

a.  Have timing and temperature demand control provided.

If the building has a floor area greater than 150m2, heating should be split into different heating 

zones and each zone should have separate controls for timing and temperature demand. 

6.16  Electric radiant heaters should have automatic zone or occupancy control through presence 

detection. 

6.17  Electric panel or skirting heaters should have controls for timing and temperature demand.

6.18  The input charge for electric storage heaters should be adjusted automatically, based on the 

internal air temperature. Manual control of heat release from the appliance should be possible.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

L1(b), L2Table 6.4  Minimum performance standards for radiant heaters6.19  Electric fan convectors should have switching to control both of the following.

a.  The local fan.

b.  The temperature of individual fan convectors.

Combined heat and power

NOTE: This section of the guidance covers CHP systems that both:

a.  have a total power capacity between 5kWe and 5MWe

b.  are used in commercial applications.

For systems with a total power capacity less than 5kWe, follow the guidance in Approved  

Document L, Volume 1: Dwellings.

6.20 CHP plant should, under annual operation, have both of the following. 

a.  A minimum CHPQA quality index (QI) of 105.

b.  Power efficiency greater than 20. 

6.21  CHP plant should have a control system that, as a minimum, ensures that the CHP unit operates as 

the lead heat generator. Metering should be provided that measures all of the following. 

a.  Hours run.

b.  Electricity generated.

c.  Fuel supplied to the CHP unit.

Dedicated domestic hot water heaters

6.22 The recommended minimum standards set out in this section apply only to dedicated water 

heaters. Central heating boilers which provide space heating and domestic hot water should meet 

the minimum standards in paragraphs 6.2 to 6.9. Heat pumps which provide domestic hot water 

should meet the minimum standards in paragraphs 6.44 to 6.46. 

6.23 In addition to meeting the general requirements for heating systems in Section 5, domestic hot 

water systems in new and existing buildings should meet the minimum thermal efficiencies in 

Table 6.5. Thermal efficiency should include the heat generator and any integral storage vessel, but 

exclude the following, where present.

a.  Secondary pipework.

b.  Fans and pumps.

c.  Diverter valves, solenoids, actuators.

d.  Supplementary storage vessels.

6.24 Domestic hot water systems should be sized for the anticipated domestic hot water demand of the 

building, based on BS EN 128313. Systems should not be significantly oversized. 

44  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

L1(b), L2DHW system 

Fuel type

Heat generator seasonal 

efficiency (gross calorific 

value)

Product standard

Natural gas 

91(1)

92(1)

BS EN 155022 or

BS EN 89 or

BS EN 26 as appropriate

Natural gas

91 (boiler efficiency)

Use equations (as appropriate) in paragraphs 6.3 to 6.6.

91 (boiler efficiency)

91 (boiler efficiency)

100 assumed

If primary return temperature 55C, use equation 

6.1 (0.8130  0.19100) to calculate boiler seasonal 

efficiency.

If primary return temperature 55C, use boiler full 

load efficiency (1.0100) at 80/60C flow/return 

temperatures.

If boiler seasonal efficiency values are obtained as 

net values, the factors in SAP 10 Table E4 should be 

used to convert them to gross values.

Directfired: 

new and 

existing 

buildings

Indirect

fired: new 

and existing 

buildings

Electrically

heated: new 

and existing 

buildings

NOTE:

In exceptional circumstances, where a condensing boiler cannot feasibly be fitted in an existing building (for 

example, where there is insufficient space for a replacement flue system), a boiler with the following minimum 

seasonal efficiency may be used:

a.  80 for natural gas

b.  79 for LPG.

6.25 Where efficiency data is not readily available, efficiencies should be calculated using 

manufacturers recovery rates and equations 6.5 and 6.6. 

gross thermal efficiency  heater output / gross input 

heater 

output

recovery rate 

of heater in 

litres/second

specific heat 

capacity of 

water

temperature rise  

of water

equation 6.5

equation 6.6

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

L1(b), L2Table 6.5   Minimum thermal efficiencies for domestic hot water (DHW) systemsControls for combustionheated domestic hot water systems

6.26 Domestic hot water systems should have both of the following. 

a.  Time control which is independent of space heating circuits.

b.  Electronic temperature control.

6.27 Primary hot water circuits for domestic hot water or heating should have fully pumped circulation 

where this is compatible with the heat generator. 

6.28 Directfired circulator systems, directfired storage systems and indirectfired circulator systems 

should have automatic thermostatic control to do both of the following.

a.  Shut off the burner/primary heat supply when the desired water temperature is reached.

b.  Shut off primary flow if the system temperature is too high.

6.29 Directfired continuous flow systems should include both of the following.

a.  A flow sensor to control the rate of flow through the heat exchanger. This should both:

i.  control outlet temperatures 

if the sensor detects insufficient flow, shut off the burner/heat input.

b.  A high limit thermostat to shut off the primary flow if the system temperature is too high.

Controls for electrically heated domestic hot water systems

6.30 Pointofuse, local and centralised electrically heated domestic hot water systems should have 

automatic thermostatic control to interrupt the electrical supply when either of the following 

occurs. 

a.  The setpoint storage temperature is reached.

b.  The system temperature gets too high.

Manual reset should be possible if there is an overtemperature trip.

6.31  Local and centralised electrically heated domestic hot water systems should have both of the 

following.

a.  Sevenday time control.

b.  The facility to boost the temperature by using an immersion heater in the cylinder.

6.32 Water heaters in instantaneous electrically heated domestic hot water systems should include both 

of the following.

a.  A flow sensor to control the rate of flow through the heat exchanger. If the sensor detects 

insufficient flow, it should shut off the electrical input.

b.  A high limit thermostat to shut off the primary flow if the system temperature is too high.

46  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

L1(b), L2Comfort cooling

NOTE: Evaporative cooling and desiccant cooling systems are not within the scope of this 

guidance. 

6.33 In addition to meeting the general requirements for cooling systems in Section 5, the seasonal 

energy efficiency ratio (SEER) of each cooling unit should meet the minimum standards in Table 6.6. 

6.34 The specification of comfort cooling systems should be based on an appropriate heat gain 

calculation for the building, based on CIBSEs Guide A. Systems should not be significantly 

oversized. In most circumstances this means that the cooling appliance should not be sized for 

more than 120 of the design cooling load.

Singleduct type

Other types

Packaged air conditioners

Split and multisplit air conditioners 12kW

Split and multisplit air conditioners 12kW

Variable refrigerant flow/volume (VRF/VRV) systems(2)

Watertowater chillers 400kW

Watertowater chillers 4001500kW

Watertowater chillers 1500kW

Vapour compression cycle chillers, aircooled 400kW

Vapour compression cycle chillers, aircooled 400kW

Absorption cycle chillers(3)

Gasenginedriven variable refrigerant flow 

Cooling unit SEER

EER 0.7

NOTES:

1.  Seasonal space cooling energy efficiency as defined by the Ecodesign Commission Regulation No. 206/2012 

Annex II, at average rating conditions where applicable.

2.  For VRV/VRF systems, SEER is for the full system including indoor units.

3.  For absorption chillers an EER (energy efficiency ratio) has been used instead. This should be determined 

according to BS EN 145112.

Controls

6.35 Comfort cooling/airconditioning systems should have all of the following controls.

a.  The systems should be subdivided into separate control zones for areas of the building for which 

any of the following are significantly different. 

i.  Solar exposure.

ii.  Pattern of use.

iii.  Type of use.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

L1(b), L2Table 6.6  Minimum seasonal energy efficiency ratio (SEER)(1) for comfort coolingb.  For each control zone and for each terminal unit, it should be possible to control both of the 

following (independent of other control zones).

i.  Timing.

ii.  Temperature. 

If both heating and cooling are provided in the same space, the controls should prevent them 

operating simultaneously.

d.  Multiple cooling units should be provided with controls that ensure that the combined plant 

operates in its most efficient modes. Central plant should operate only when the zone systems 

require it. The default condition should be off.

e.  Controls for comfort cooling systems should meet BS EN 15232 Band C. 

f.  Controls should meet the requirements for thermostatic room controls in paragraphs 5.14 to 5.16.

Calculating the seasonal energy efficiency ratio 

6.36 The value of the seasonal energy efficiency ratio (SEER) and the seasonal coefficient of 

performance (SCOP) should be determined using BS EN 14825 with average climate data; in 

conjunction with the Ecodesign Commission Regulation No. 2016/2281. The SEER of the cooling 

unit is given by equation 6.7.

SEER  a(EER100)  b(EER75)  c(EER50)  d(EER25) 

Where: 

equation 6.7

EERx is the EER measured at the load conditions of 100, 75, 50 and 25 at the operating 

conditions detailed for the part load energy efficiency ratio.

a, b, c and d are the load profile weighting factors relevant to the proposed application. The load 

profile weighting factors can be taken from either of the following.

a.  Table 6.7, if appropriate.

b.  A detailed simulation or prediction of the load profile of the building. The calculation should 

include the desired indoor condition as well as the ambient loads in which the system will work.

6.37 For cooling units for which there is no part load data, the SEER is the full load EER.

For applications where the load profile is not known but there is some data on chiller part load EER, 

the following apply.

a.  For chillers where the full and half load (50) EERs are known: the SEER is the average of the full 

load and half load EERs.

b.  For chillers with four points of part load EER: the SEER is calculated using equation 6.7 with each 

EER weighted equally.

If the chiller used does not have data for four steps of load: the weights are apportioned 

appropriately.

48  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

L1(b), L2Table 6.7  Standard cooling load factors for office accommodation6.38 For plants with multiple chillers, a plant seasonal energy efficiency ratio (SEER) should be 

calculated based on the sum of the energy consumption of all the operating chillers. All the 

following factors should be included. 

a.  Degree of oversizing of the total installed capacity.

b.  Sizes of individual chillers.

c.  EERs of individual chillers in operating conditions.

d.  Control mode used, e.g. parallel, sequential, dedicated low load unit.

e.  Load profile of the proposed building.

f.  Building location (which determines ambient conditions).

6.39 For systems that have the ability to use free cooling or heat recovery, the SEER should be derived 

for the specific application, including free cooling or heat recovery elements. For variable 

refrigerant flow (VRF) systems, any calculations must include indoor and outdoor conditions, the 

power input from controls, and indoor units.

6.40 For absorption chillers used in conjunction with onsite CHP or a district heat network or 

community heating system, the CO2 emissions and primary energy should be calculated in the 

same way as when using CHP for heating. The control system should ensure as far as possible that 

heat from boilers is not used to supply the absorption chiller. The minimum full load EER of the 

absorption chillers should be no worse than 0.7.

6.41  For district cooling schemes, the CO2 and primary energy content of the cooling energy supplied 

should be calculated. This value should be used to calculate the building emission rate and primary 

energy rate.

Heating and cooling system circulators and water pumps 

6.42 On variable volume systems, variable speed glandless circulators should be used.

6.43 If a water pump is used on a closed loop circuit and the motor is rated at more than 750W, then 

it should be fitted with or controlled by an appropriate variable speed controller on any variable 

volume system.

Heat pumps 

6.44 Airtoair heat pumps with an output of 12kW or less should have either of the following.

a.  A seasonal coefficient of performance (SCOP) rating for the median temperature range in  

BS EN 14825 of at least D.

b.  A coefficient of performance (COP) that is not less than the value in Table 6.8.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

L1(b), L2Heat pump type

Minimum COP (at rating conditions in BS EN 145112)

All types (except airtoair with output 12kW, absorption 

and gasengine) for space heating(1)

All types (except absorption and gasengine) for 

domestic hot water heating

Absorption 

Gasengine

NOTE:

1.  For airtoair heat pumps with an output 12kW, follow paragraph 6.44.

6.45 In addition to the general guidance for zoning and controls in Section 5, any outdoor fans, including 

those in cooling towers or dry coolers, should be controlled.

6.46 For heat pump installations in which there are other heat sources available to the same building, 

each of these heat sources should be appropriately incorporated into a singular control system. 

Mechanical ventilation

6.47 The specification of ventilation systems should be based on the ventilation needs of the building, 

in accordance with Approved Document F, Volume 2: Buildings other than dwellings. 

6.48 Air handling systems should be capable of achieving a specific fan power (SFP) at 25 of design 

flow rate no greater than the SFP achieved at 100 design flow rate.

6.49 Fans used for general air distribution that are rated at more than 1100W should be fitted with 

variable speed drives.

6.50 Ventilation ductwork should be made and assembled so as to be reasonably airtight. Ductwork 

should comply with the specifications in either of the following.

a.  BESAs DW/144.

b.  BS EN 1507, BS EN 12237 and BS EN 13403.

6.51  Air handling units should be made and assembled so as to be reasonably airtight. Air handling units 

should comply with Class L2 air leakage given in BS EN 1886.

6.52 The specific fan power of air distribution systems at the design air flow rate should be no greater 

than in Table 6.9, as adjusted by the appropriate factors within this table.

Specific fan power should be calculated in accordance with BS EN 167983 at the full design load. For 

fan coil units, use BS 8850.

50  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

L1(b), L2Table 6.8  Minimum COP for heat pumps in new and existing buildings 

System type(1)

SFP (W/(ls))(2)(3)

New buildings

Existing buildings

Central balanced mechanical ventilation system with heating and cooling

Central balanced mechanical ventilation system with heating only

All other central balanced mechanical ventilation systems

Zonal supply system where fan is remote from zone, such as ceiling 

void or roofmounted units

Zonal extract system where fan is remote from zone

Zonal balanced supply and extract ventilation units, such as ceiling 

void or roof units

Local balanced supply and extract ventilation system, such as wall/

roof units

Local supply or extract ventilation units, such as window/wall/roof 

units (e.g. toilet extract)

Other local ventilation supply or extract units

Fan assisted terminal variable air volume (VAV) unit

Fan coil unit (rating weighted average(4))

Kitchen extract, fan remote from zone with grease filter

NOTES:

1.  A central system is one which serves the whole or major areas of the building. A zonal system is one which serves a 

group of rooms or areas in part of the building and requires ducting. A local system or unit is one which serves a single 

room or area and does not require ducting.

2.  For balanced supply and extract systems, the maximum SFP includes an allowance for heat recovery and return filter.

3.  Where any of the following components are included in the installation, the maximum SFP may be increased.

a.  Highefficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter: add 1.0W/(ls).

b.  Humidifier/dehumidifier: add 0.1W/(ls).

c.  Active chilled beams: add 0.3W/(ls).

d.  Transpired solar collector: add 0.3W/(ls).

For example, a central balanced mechanical ventilation system with heating and cooling, HEPA filter and 

humidifier, installed in a new building.

SFP   2.0  1.0  0.1 

 3.1W/(ls)

4.  The rating weighted average is calculated using the following formula:

(Pmains,1  SFP1)  (Pmains,2  SFP2)  (Pmains,3  SFP3)  ...

(Pmains,1  Pmains,2  Pmains,3...)

where Pmains is useful power supplied from the mains in W.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

L1(b), L2Table 6.9  Maximum specific fan power (SFP) in air distribution systems in new and existing buildingsControls

6.53 Mechanical ventilation systems should have all of the following.

a.  The systems should be subdivided into separate control zones for areas of the building for which 

any of the following are significantly different. 

i.  Solar exposure.

ii.  Pattern of use. 

iii.  Type of use.

b.  For each control zone it should be possible to control all of the following (independent of other 

control zones). 

i.  Timing 

ii.  Where appropriate, temperature. 

iii.  Where appropriate, ventilation rate. 

iv.  Where appropriate, air recirculation rate.

c.  Central plant should operate only when the zone systems require it. The default condition 

should be off.

6.54 System controls should be wired so that when there is no demand for space heating or hot water, 

the heating appliance, if appropriate, and pump are switched off.

6.55 Central mechanical ventilation systems should have both of the following.

a.  Time control at room level. 

b.  On/off time control at air handler level.  

6.56 Heat exchangers should have both of the following.

a.  Defrost control to protect the heat exchanger. 

b.  Control to ensure that heat recovery can be stopped, modulated or bypassed during periods 

when heat recovery is undesirable.

Supply temperature control should be provided via a variable set point with outdoor temperature 

compensation.

6.57 Local and zonal systems should have on/off air flow control at room level.

Heat recovery

6.58 Ventilation systems that provide supply and extract ventilation should be fitted with a heat 

recovery system where technically feasible.

Lighting

6.59 Any fixed lighting should achieve levels of illumination appropriate to the activity in the space. 

Spaces should not be overilluminated. Lighting should be designed based on CIBSEs SLL Lighting 

Handbook or an equivalent design guide.

NOTE: For smaller spaces where total lighting power is likely to be low (toilets, store rooms etc.) 

there is no expectation that lighting calculations should be produced.

52  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

L1(b), L26.60 Lighting should observe the following.

If it is general lighting, either:

i.  have an average luminaire efficacy of 95 luminaire lumens per circuitwatt

ii.  the Lighting Energy Numeric Indicator (LENI) method, following Appendix B. 

If it is display lighting, any of the following:

i.  have an average light source efficacy of 80 light source lumens per circuitwatt

ii.  have a rated power usage no greater than 0.3W/m2 in each space

iii.  the LENI method, following Appendix B.

c.  For high excitation purity light sources, an average light source efficacy of 65 light source lumens 

per circuitwatt.

NOTE: This approved document does not include minimum standards for specialist lighting, such as 

theatrical spotlights, stage lighting, gobo projectors or wallwashers.

6.61  General lighting and display lighting should be metered by one of the following methods.

a.  Dedicated lighting circuits with a kWh meter for each circuit.

b.  Local power meter coupled to or integrated in the lighting controllers of a lighting management 

system.

c.  A lighting management system that can both:

i.  calculate the consumed energy 

ii.  make this information available to a building management system.

Lighting controls

6.62 Lighting controls in new and existing buildings should follow the guidance in the Building Research 

Establishments Digest 498.

6.63 Unoccupied spaces should have automatic controls to turn the general lighting off when the space 

is not in use (e.g. through presence detection). Occupied spaces should have automatic controls 

where suitable for the use of the space.

6.64 General lighting in occupied spaces should have daylight controls (e.g. photoswitching and 

dimming) for parts of the space which are likely to receive high levels of natural light.

6.65 Display lighting should be controlled on dedicated circuits that can be switched separately from 

those for lighting provided for general illuminance.

Building automation and control systems

6.66 If a new building has a space heating or airconditioning system with an effective rated output 

greater than 180kW, a building automation and control system should be installed.

6.67 If an existing building has a space heating or airconditioning system with an effective rated output 

greater than 180kW, a building automation and control system being replaced or installed should 

follow paragraphs 6.72 and 6.73. 

NOTE: The requirements in paragraphs 6.66 and 6.67 also apply to buildings containing heating and 

airconditioning systems which are combined with ventilation systems. 

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

L1(b), L26.68 For building systems that do not satisfy paragraph 6.66 or 6.67, consideration should be given 

to providing centralised controls to allow the facilities manager to switch off appliances when 

they are not needed. Where appropriate, these should be automated (with manual override) so 

that energy savings are maximised. Consideration should be given to the power requirements of 

essential (e.g. life safety) systems.

Determining the effective rated output

6.69 The effective rated output of a space heating or air conditioning system is the combined output of 

the equipment in the building which is provided for heating or cooling the internal space in normal 

operation, for the comfort of occupants. 

For airconditioning systems, the effective rated output should include the combined maximum 

output of both of the following, as specified by the manufacturer. 

a.  Airconditioning systems.

b.  Airconditioning systems combined with or as part of a ventilation system. 

For heating systems, the effective rated output should include the combined maximum output of all 

the following, as specified by the manufacturer. 

a.  Primary space heating systems. 

b.  Space heating systems combined with or as part of a ventilation system. 

c.  Secondary space heating systems. 

It does not include any of the following. 

d.  Heating or cooling equipment only intended for emergency or occasional backup use.

e.  Heating equipment for frost protection.

f.  Heating for domestic hot water.

g.  Heating or cooling for industrial processes.

6.70 If the building is heated through a district heat network or community heating system, the effective 

rated output should be based on the capacity of the equipment installed in the building, making 

reasonable assumptions for the operation of the district heat network or community heating 

system, including flow temperatures. 

6.71  The effective rated output should be assessed based on the final installed capacity of the heating 

or airconditioning system. When estimating the effective rated output at the design stage, 

designers should make allowances for the final installed capacity, including potential oversizing and 

equipment substitution.

Building automation and control system specification

6.72 A building automation and control system installed in a new or existing building, where the building 

meets the space heating or cooling criteria in paragraphs 6.66 and 6.67, should be capable of 

carrying out all of the following functions.

a.  Fully complies with BS EN ISO 16484.

b.  Continuously monitors, logs, analyses and allows for adjusting energy use.

54  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

L1(b), L2c.  Benchmarks the buildings energy efficiency, detects losses in efficiency of heating, ventilation 

and air conditioning systems, and informs the person responsible for the facilities or building 

management about opportunities for energy efficiency improvement.

d.  Allows communication with connected fixed building services and other appliances inside the 

building and is interoperable with fixed building services across different types of proprietary 

technologies, devices and manufacturers.

NOTE: A BS EN 15232 Class A rated type system would meet these requirements.

6.73 Where a building automation and control system is installed, its control capabilities should be 

appropriate for the building, its expected usage and the building services specification. 

Onsite electricity generation and storage

6.74 Where onsite electricity generation and storage is installed, such as photovoltaic panels or battery 

storage, systems should be an appropriate size for the site, available infrastructure and onsite 

energy demand.

6.75 The system should be specified and installed according to the manufacturers instructions to ensure 

the overall performance of the system meets a reasonable standard.

6.76 When replacing an existing system, the installed generation capacity of the new system should be 

no less than that of the existing system, except where a smaller system can be demonstrated to 

be more appropriate or effective (e.g. replacing an existing system with a system which is better 

matched to the buildings energy demand).

6.77 Onsite electricity generation should be provided with automated controls that support the design 

of the system and the intended use. This is particularly the case where electricity generation and 

storage systems are used, such as batteries.

District heat networks and community heating

6.78 The central heat source for community heating systems should comply with the relevant minimum 

standards outlined throughout Section 6 of this approved document.  

6.79 A district heat network that is being connected to a new building should not have a CO2 emission 

factor for delivered heat to the building which is greater than 0.350kgCO2/kWh.   

NOTE: The same CO2 emission factors used to calculate the building emission rate described 

in paragraph 2.7 of this approved document should be used to check against the minimum 

performance standards described in paragraph 6.79.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

L1(b), L2Regulation 43: Pressure testing

This section deals with the requirements of regulation 43 of the Building Regulations 2010.

Regulation

Pressure testing

(1)   This regulation applies to the erection of a building in relation to which paragraph L1(a)(i) of Schedule 1 

imposes a requirement. 

(2)   Where this regulation applies, the person carrying out the work shall, for the purpose of ensuring compliance 

with regulation 26 and regulation 26A and paragraph L1(a)(i) of Schedule 1 

(a)  ensure that 

(i)   pressure testing is carried out in such circumstances as are approved by the Secretary of State; and 

(ii)   the testing is carried out in accordance with a procedure approved by the Secretary of State; and 

(b)   subject to paragraph (5), give notice of the results of the testing to the local authority. 

(3)   The notice referred to in paragraph (2)(b) shall 

(a)   record the results and the data upon which they are based in a manner approved by the Secretary of 

State; and 

(b)   be given to the local authority not later than seven days after the final test is carried out. 

(4)   A local authority are authorised to accept, as evidence that the requirements of paragraph (2)(a)(ii) have been 

satisfied, a certificate to that effect by a person who is registered by Elmhurst Energy Systems Limited or 

the Air Tightness Testing and Measurement Association in respect of pressure testing for the air tightness of 

buildings.

(5)   Where such a certificate contains the information required by paragraph (3)(a), paragraph (2)(b) does not 

apply.

NOTE: Where the building control body is an approved inspector, see regulation 20 of the Building 

(Approved Inspectors etc.) Regulations 2010 (as amended).

Intention

In the Secretary of States view, the requirements of regulation 43 are met, when a building is erected, 

by carrying out pressure testing in accordance with paragraphs 7.2 to 7.5 and 7.9.

In the Secretary of States view, results from a pressure test must be used to show that work complies 

with both of the following.

a.  Regulation 26 and 26A of the Building Regulations, in accordance with paragraphs 7.6 to 7.8.

b.  The requirements of Part L1(a)(i) of Schedule 1 to the Building Regulations, in accordance with 

paragraphs 7.1 and 7.6. 

56  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R43 

Section 7: Air permeability and pressure 

testing

7.1  The minimum standard for air permeability of a new building is given in Table 4.1 of Section 4.

7.2  The building control body should be provided with evidence that test equipment has been 

calibrated using a UKASaccredited facility or by the original manufacturer within either of the 

following periods.

a.  The previous 12 months.

b.  A period in accordance with manufacturers guidance. 

Calibration should be carried out in accordance with CIBSEs TM23. It is recommended that test 

equipment is recalibrated at least every 24 months.

7.3  Building control bodies may accept a pressure test certificate as evidence that the building 

complies with regulation 43 of the Building Regulations.

The building control body should be provided with evidence that the person who pressuretested 

the building meets both of the following. 

a.  Has received appropriate training.

Is registered to test the specific class of building. 

7.4  Buildings that are not dwellings, including extensions that are being treated as new buildings to 

comply with Part L, must be pressure tested except those types listed in paragraph 7.5.

7.5  The following buildings do not need to undergo pressure testing.

a.  Buildings with less than 500m2 total useful floor area. In this case the developer may avoid a 

pressure test, provided that the air permeability used to calculate the building primary energy 

rate and building emission rate is taken as 15m3/(hm2) at 50Pa.

b.  A factorymade modular building that meets the following criteria:

the floor area is less than 500m2

ii.  the building has a planned service life of more than two years, where the intended time of 

use in a single location is less than two years

iii.  no site assembly work is needed other than linking standard modules using standard link 

details.

If the building as installed conforms to a standard configuration of modules and link details 

for which the installer has pressure test data, this test data may be used to estimate the air 

permeability. Test data must be from a minimum of five insitu measurements of the same 

module types and link details as used in the actual building. Air permeability should be in m3/

(hm2) at 50Pa. When calculating the building primary energy rate and building emission rate for 

a factorymade modular building as described above, the value that should be used for design air 

permeability is the average air permeability test result at 50Pa plus 1.0m3/(hm2).

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

R43c.  Large extensions. If the building control body agrees that sealing off and testing the extension 

separately from the existing building is impractical, the extension should be treated as a large, 

complex building  see paragraph 7.5d.

d.  Large complex buildings. If pressure testing is impractical due to the size or complexity of the 

building, the developer may produce both of the following.

i.  A detailed justification of why pressure testing is impractical.

ii.  A detailed strategy to give confidence that a continuous air barrier will be achieved.

It is reasonable for the building control body to accept this strategy in place of a pressure test to 

assess compliance. 

The developer should seek expert advice to confirm the justification and strategy in paragraph 

7.5d. Any justification and strategy should be in line with the approved airtightness testing 

methodology, CIBSEs TM23. It would not be reasonable to claim that air permeability better than 

5.0m3/(h.m2) at 50Pa had been achieved. 

e.  Compartmentalised buildings. If buildings are compartmentalised into selfcontained units with 

no internal connections, it is reasonable for the building control body to accept a pressure test 

carried out on a representative area of the building as evidence of the buildings air permeability. 

If the area of the building fails the test, the criteria in paragraphs 7.1 and 7.6 apply, but the 

developer should also carry out a further test on another representative area to confirm that all 

parts of the building achieve the expected standard.

Showing compliance and reporting pressure test results

7.6  The building primary energy rate and building emission rate calculated using the measured air 

permeability must not be higher than the target primary energy rate and target emission rate, 

respectively.

If the criteria in paragraphs 7.1 and 7.6 are not achieved, the building air permeability should be 

improved. New tests should be carried out until the building achieves the criteria in paragraphs 7.1 

and 7.6.

7.8  The results of all pressure tests on buildings, including any test failures, should be reported to the 

building control body.

Air pressure testing procedure

7.9  Air pressure tests should be performed following the guidance in the approved airtightness 

testing methodology, CIBSEs TM23. The procedures in that document have been approved by the 

Secretary of State.

58  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R43Regulations 44 and 44ZA and requirements 

L1(b)(iii) and L2(b): Commissioning 

This section deals with the requirements of regulations 44 and 44ZA and Part L1(b)(iii) and L2(b) of 

Schedule 1 to the Building Regulations 2010. 

Regulation

Commissioning

(1)   This regulation applies to building work in relation to which paragraph F1(2) of Schedule 1 imposes 

a requirement, but does not apply to the provision or extension of any fixed system for mechanical 

ventilation or any associated controls where testing and adjustment is not possible. 

(2)   This regulation applies to building work in relation to which paragraph L1(b) of Schedule 1 imposes 

a requirement, but does not apply to the provision or extension of any fixed building service where 

testing and adjustment is not possible or would not affect the energy efficiency of that fixed building 

service.

(3)   Where this regulation applies the person carrying out the work shall, for the purpose of ensuring 

compliance with paragraph F1(2) or L1(b) of Schedule 1, give to the local authority a notice confirming 

that the fixed building services have been commissioned in accordance with a procedure approved by 

the Secretary of State.

(4)   The notice shall be given to the local authority

(a)  not later than the date on which the notice required by regulation 16(4) is required to be given; or

(b)  where that regulation does not apply, not more than 30 days after completion of the work.

Commissioning in respect of a system for onsite electricity generation  

44ZA. 

(1)   This regulation applies to building work in respect of a building in relation to which paragraph L2 of 

Schedule 1 imposes a requirement, but does not apply to the provision or extension of any system for 

onsite electricity generation where testing and adjustment is not possible.

(2)   Where this regulation applies the person carrying out the work must, for the purpose of ensuring 

compliance with paragraph L2 of Schedule 1, give to the local authority a notice confirming that the 

system for onsite electricity generation has been commissioned.

(3)  The notice must be given to the local authority

(a)  not later than the date on which the notice required by regulation 16(4) is required to be given; or

(b)  where that regulation does not apply, not more than 30 days after completion of the work.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

R44, R44ZA, L1(b), L2(b) 

Limits on application

Requirement

Requirement

Schedule 1  Part L Conservation of fuel and power

 Reasonable provision shall be made for the  

conservation of fuel and power in buildings by 

  (a)  limiting heat gains and loses

(i)   through thermal elements and other parts of 

the building fabric; and

(ii)   from pipes, ducts and vessels used for 

space heating, space cooling and hot water 

services; 

(b)  providing fixed building services which

(i)  are energy efficient to a reasonable standard;

(ii)  have effective controls; and

(iii)  are commissioned by testing and adjusting 

as necessary to ensure they use no more 

fuel and power than is reasonable in the 

circumstances.

 Where a system for onsite electricity generation is 

installed

(a)  r easonable provision must be made to ensure 

that

(i)   the system and its electrical output are 

appropriately sized for the site and available 

infrastructure;

(ii)  the system has effective controls; and

(b)  it must be commissioned by testing and 

adjusting as necessary to ensure that it 

produces the maximum electricity that is 

reasonable in the circumstances.

NOTE: Where the building control body is an approved inspector, see regulation 20 of the Building 

(Approved Inspectors etc.) Regulations 2010 (as amended).

Intention

In the Secretary of States view, requirements L1(b)(iii) and L2(b) and the requirements of regulations 

44 and 44ZA are met by commissioning fixed building services and onsite electricity generation in 

accordance with Section 8.

60  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R44, R44ZA, L1(b), L2(b) 

Section 8: Commissioning

8.1  Fixed building services must be commissioned to ensure that they use no more fuel and power than 

is reasonable in the circumstances. Onsite electricity generation systems must be commissioned 

to ensure that they produce as much electricity as is reasonable in the circumstances. The 

commissioning process should involve testing and adjusting the fixed building services and onsite 

electricity generation as necessary and in accordance with the manufacturers instructions.

8.2  Fixed building services should be commissioned with the aim of optimising their inuse 

performance, with reference to Section 5 and Section 6 of this approved document, which provide 

further guidance on minimum efficiencies, controls and other relevant standards. 

8.3  For large or complex projects, a commissioning manager should be appointed. In all other cases, 

the appointment of a commissioning manager should be considered on a casebycase basis. The 

competence of the commissioning manager should meet the list of knowledge and skills set out in 

CIBSEs Commissioning Code M.

8.4  When installing a fixed building service, or onsite electricity generation that is subject to the 

energy efficiency requirements, a commissioning plan should be prepared that identifies all of the 

following. 

a.  The systems to test.

b.  The tests to complete.

c.  Schedule of commissioning.

d.  Roles and responsibilities.

e.  Documentation requirements.

The building control body should be given all of the following.

a.  The commissioning plan.

b.  The designstage target primary energy rate and building primary energy rate calculation.

c.  The designstage target emission rate and building emission rate calculation.

The building control body can then check that commissioning is being done as the work proceeds.

8.5  If the only controls for a fixed building service or onsite electricity generation are on and off 

switches, this particular service does not need to be commissioned. 

8.6  Any commissioning should be carried out in accordance with all of the following procedures.

a.  CIBSEs Commissioning Code M.

b.  Any of the following.

i.  The specific CIBSE Commissioning Codes relevant to each service being commissioned.

ii.  The specific BSRIA Commissioning Guides relevant to each service being commissioned.

iii.  A combination of (i) and (ii).

c.  The procedures for air leakage testing of ductwork given in paragraphs 8.10 to 8.13.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

R44, R44ZA, L1(b), L2(b)Notice of completion

8.7  A commissioning notice must be given to the relevant building control body and the building 

owner confirming that commissioning has been carried out for the installed fixed building services 

and onsite electricity generation according to the procedures in this section. The notice should 

confirm all of the following.

a.  That the commissioning plan has been followed.

b.  That all systems have been inspected in an appropriate sequence and to a reasonable standard. 

c.  That test results confirm that the performance of the system is reasonably in accordance with 

the actual building design, including written commentary on any areas where building services 

do not perform as well as intended.

8.8  The notice of completion of commissioning should be given as follows. 

If a building notice or full plans have been given to a local authority building control body, the 

notice should be given within five days of the commissioning work being completed.

If the building control body is an approved inspector, the notice should generally be given to the 

approved inspector within five days of the work being completed. 

In other cases  for example, if the work is carried out by a person registered with a competent 

person scheme  the notice must be given to the building control body within 30 days of the 

work being completed.

8.9  Where fixed building services and onsite electricity generation that require commissioning are 

installed by a person registered with a competent person scheme, that person may give the notice 

of completion of commissioning.

Air leakage testing of ductwork

8.10  For ducted systems that are served by fans with a design flow rate greater than 1m3/s, ductwork 

leakage tests should be carried out. Tests should follow the procedures in the Building and 

Engineering Services Association (BESA) documents DW/143 and DW/144.

8.11  For lowpressure ductwork, if at least 10 of the ductwork is tested at random and achieves the 

lowpressure standard as defined by DW/143, a calculated improvement in both the building 

primary energy rate and building emission rate may be claimed. Details are given in the National 

Calculation Methodology Modelling Guide.

8.12  Membership of the BESA Specialist Ductwork Group or the Association of Ductwork Contractors 

and Allied Services (ADCAS) is one way of demonstrating suitable competency for ductwork 

pressure testing work.

8.13  Air leakage rates are given in Table 8.1. If a ductwork system fails to meet the air leakage limit in 

Table 8.1, both of the following apply.

a.  Remedial work should be carried out to achieve satisfactory performance in retests.

b.  Further ductwork sections should be tested as set out in DW/143.

62  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R44, R44ZA, L1(b), L2(b)Ductwork pressure class

Design static pressure (Pa)

Maximum positive Maximum negative

Maximum air 

velocity (m/s)

Air leakage limit (l/(sm2) 

of duct surface area)(1)

Low pressure (class A)

Medium pressure (class B)

High pressure (class C)

High pressure (class D)

NOTE:

1.  p is the differential pressure in pascals.

0.027 p0.65

0.009 p0.65

0.003 p0.65

0.001 p0.65

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

R44, R44ZA, L1(b), L2(b)Table 8.1  Ductwork pressure classes 

Regulations 40 and 40A: Providing 

information 

This section deals with the requirements of regulations 40 and 40A of the Building Regulations 2010.

Regulations

Information about use of fuel and power 

40.   

(1)   This regulation applies where paragraph L1 of Schedule 1 imposes a requirement in relation to building 

work. 

(2)   The person carrying out the work shall not later than five days after the work has been completed provide 

to the owner sufficient information about the building, the fixed building services and their maintenance 

requirements so that the building can be operated in such a manner as to use no more fuel and power 

than is reasonable in the circumstances.

Information about systems for onsite generation of electricity

40A. 

(1)   This regulation applies to building work in respect of a building in relation to which paragraph L2 of 

Schedule 1 applies. 

(2)   The person carrying out the work must, not later than five days after the work has been completed, 

provide to the owner sufficient information about the system for onsite electricity generation in respect 

to its operation and maintenance requirements so that the system may be operated and maintained in 

such a manner as to produce the maximum electricity that is reasonable in the circumstances and delivers 

this electricity to the optimal place for use.

Intention

In the Secretary of States view, when a new building is erected, the requirements of regulations 40  

and 40A are met by providing the owner with information about all of the following. 

a.  Operating and maintenance instructions for fixed building services and onsite electricity 

generation, in accordance with paragraphs 9.1 to 9.3. 

b.  Other important documentation, as given in paragraphs 9.4 to 9.6.

In the Secretary of States view, the requirements of regulations 40 and 40A are met when work is 

carried out on an existing building by providing the owner with both of the following. 

a.  Operating and maintenance instructions for the work on fixed building services and onsite 

electricity generation that has been carried out in accordance with paragraphs 9.1 and 9.3. 

b.  Relevant information for work on existing systems, as detailed in paragraphs 9.7 to 9.12. 

64  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R40, R40A 

Section 9: Providing information

Operating and maintenance instructions

9.1  For a new building and for work to an existing building, operating and maintenance instructions 

should be given to the owner of the building in a building log book. The log book should follow 

the guidance in CIBSEs TM31.

Information in the log book should be presented in templates the same as or similar to those in 

CIBSEs TM31.

NOTE: Information in the log book may draw on or refer to information available as part of other 

documentation, such as the operation and maintenance manuals or the health and safety file. 

Further advice is provided in BSRIAs BG 26/2011.

9.3  For new buildings and for work that has been carried out on existing buildings, the information 

provided should contain all of the following. 

Information so that the building can be operated in an energy efficient manner, including 

information about:

the building

ii.  the fixed building services and onsite electricity generation

iii.  the maintenance requirements of the fixed building services and onsite electricity 

generation.

b.  A copy of the completed commissioning records. 

Additional information for new buildings

9.4  For new buildings with a total useful floor area over 1000m2, the information to be handed over to 

the building owner should include a forecast of the actual energy use of the building in kWh/year 

broken down by fuel type. The energy forecast should include all metered energy uses, including 

unregulated loads. This may be determined using any of the following methods, and should be 

recorded in the building log book:

a.  design calculations

b.  energy benchmarks

c.  an energy forecasting methodology such as CIBSEs TM54

d.  other building modelling or spreadsheet tools

e.  any combination of (a) to (d).

NOTE: The compliance outputs of SBEM or other Building Regulations compliance tools are not 

suitable for direct use as energy forecasting estimates for any size of building. 

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

R40, R40A9.5  For new buildings, information provided in the log book should also include all of the following. 

a.  Data on the inputs used in the calculations of target primary energy rate, target emission rate, 

building primary energy rate and building emission rate.

b.  The recommendations report generated with the onconstruction energy performance 

certificate.

9.6  Where building automation and control systems are installed in a new building, information about 

the energy performance of the building automation and control systems should also be given to 

the building owner.

Additional information for work in existing buildings

9.7  For existing buildings, information added to a new or existing log book should satisfy paragraphs 

9.1 to 9.3. This applies only in relation to the work that has actually been carried out. Information 

provided should also include all of the following, where relevant.

a.  Any new, renovated or upgraded thermal elements. 

b.  Any new or renovated windows, roof windows, rooflights or doors (controlled fittings). 

c.  Any newly installed energy meters. 

9.8  For existing buildings, when any building work is carried out for which Section 5 and/or Section 6 

of this approved document sets a standard, the energy performance of the fixed building services 

and onsite electricity generation affected by the work should be assessed and documented.

9.9  For existing buildings, when installing a complete new or replacement system (e.g. replacing 

a heating system including the heating appliance, pipework and heat emitters), the energy 

performance of the whole system should be assessed, and the results documented and handed 

over to the building owner with the manufacturers supporting literature. The record of energy 

performance results may be any of the following.

a.  A documented assessment using an approved methodology, such as a new energy performance 

certificate.

b.  A documented assessment of the installed system produced in accordance with Ecodesign and 

associated energy labelling requirements.

c.  A documented assessment of a reasonably representative complete system produced by the 

product manufacturer.

d.  Another equivalent assessment carried out by a suitably qualified person.

9.10  When carrying out work on an existing system, such as installing or replacing components (e.g. 

replacing a boiler but retaining the pipework and heat emitters), the energy performance of the 

new components should be assessed. The results should be recorded and given to the building 

owner. The record of energy performance results may be any of the following.

a.  Product data sheets from the product manufacturer.

b.  Other documented results of energy assessment of the product carried out in accordance with 

relevant test standards.

66  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R40, R40A9.11  If carrying out work on an existing system fundamentally alters the energy performance or CO2 

emissions performance of the system then the complete altered system should be assessed and 

the guidance for new or replacement systems in paragraph 9.9 should be followed. Such work may 

include the following. 

a.  A change in heating fuel for a space heating or domestic hot water system. 

b.  Extending or expanding the capacity of a space heating, comfort cooling or ventilation system 

by over 25 of its previous capacity. 

9.12  Where building work is carried out on first fitout (for example, shell and core buildings or partially 

occupied buildings) the building logbook should be updated, following paragraphs 9.7 to 9.11, and 

provided to the building owner.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

R40, R40ARegulation 23(2) and requirement L1(a): 

Replacement of thermal elements and limiting 

heat gains and losses

This section deals with the requirements of regulation 23(2) and Part L1(a) of Schedule 1 to the 

Building Regulations 2010.

Regulation

Requirements for the renovation or replacement of thermal elements

23.   (2)   Where the whole or any part of an individual thermal element is proposed to be replaced and the 

replacement

(a)  constitutes a major renovation; or

(b)   (in the case of part replacement) amounts to the replacement of more than 50 of the thermal 

elements surface area;

 the whole of the thermal element must be replaced so as to ensure that it complies with paragraph L1(a)(i) 

of Schedule 1, in so far as that is technically, functionally and economically feasible.

Limits on application

Requirement

Requirement

Schedule 1  Part L Conservation of fuel and power

 Reasonable provision shall be made for the 

conservation of fuel and power in buildings by: 

  (a)  limiting heat gains and losses

(i)   through thermal elements and other parts 

of the building fabric; and

(ii)  from pipes, ducts and vessels used for 

space heating, space cooling and hot water 

services; 

  (b)  providing fixed building services which

(i)  are energy efficient to a reasonable standard;

(ii)  have effective controls; and

(iii)  are commissioned by testing and adjusting 

as necessary to ensure they use no more 

fuel and power than is reasonable in the 

circumstances.

68  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R23(2), L1(a) 

Intention

In the Secretary of States view, the requirements of regulation 23(2) and requirement L1(a) are met for 

new or replacement elements in existing buildings by following the standards in Section 10. 

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

R23(2), L1(a)Section 10: New elements in existing buildings, 

including extensions 

General 

10.1  This section provides guidance for new elements in existing buildings, including all the following 

types of work. 

a.  Providing a new thermal element in an existing building  follow paragraph 10.2. 

b.  Providing a replacement thermal element in an existing building  follow paragraph 10.2. 

c.  Replacing windows, doors or rooflights (controlled fittings) in an existing building  follow 

paragraphs 10.3 to 10.5. 

d.  Extending an existing building  follow paragraphs 10.6 to 10.11.

e.  Adding a conservatory or porch to an existing building  follow paragraphs 10.12 and 10.13.

NOTE: Guidance for renovating or retaining elements in existing buildings is given in Section 11. 

New and replacement thermal elements 

10.2  The minimum standards in paragraphs 4.5 and 4.6 and Table 4.1 should be met for both of the 

following. 

a.  New thermal elements installed in an existing building.

b.  Thermal elements constructed to replace existing thermal elements. 

New and replacement windows, roof windows, rooflights 

and doors (controlled fittings) 

10.3  If the entire unit of windows, roof windows, rooflights or doors is replaced, all the following apply.

a.  Units should be draughtproofed. 

b.  Units should meet the minimum standards in Table 4.1. 

Insulated cavity closers should be installed where appropriate. 

10.4  For windows used in buildings similar to dwellings, building control bodies may accept, as evidence 

of compliance with the standards given in Table 4.1, a Window Energy Rating from a certification 

scheme that provides a quality assured process and supporting audit trail from calculating the 

performance of the window through to the window being installed.

70  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R23(2), L1(a)10.5  If a window, pedestrian door or rooflight is enlarged or a new one created, either of the following 

should be met. 

a.  The area of windows, roof windows, rooflights and pedestrian doors should not exceed the 

relevant percentage from Table 10.1.

If the area of windows, roof windows, rooflights and pedestrian doors exceeds the relevant 

percentage from Table 10.1, compensating measures should be taken to improve the energy 

efficiency of the building.

Extension of buildings other than dwellings

10.6  Constructing an extension in buildings with a total useful floor area greater than 1000m2 triggers 

the requirement for consequential improvements. Section 12 should be followed.

10.7  An extension should be regarded as a new building, and guidance in Sections 1 to 9 should be 

followed, if the proposed extension has a total useful floor area that is both of the following.

a.  Greater than 100m2.

b.  Greater than 25 of the total useful floor area of the existing building.

If the proposed extension does not meet criteria (a) or (b) above, the guidance in paragraphs 10.8 to 

10.11 should be met.

10.8  When a building is extended, any fixed building services or onsite electricity generation that are 

provided or extended should comply with the guidance in Sections 5 and 6.

10.9  When a building is extended, elements should satisfy all of the following. 

a.  New thermal elements should meet the standards in Table 4.1. 

b.  Replacement thermal elements should meet the standards in Table 4.1. 

c.  New windows, roof windows, rooflights and doors (controlled fittings) should meet the 

standards in Table 4.1.

d.  Existing fabric elements that will become thermal elements should meet the limiting standards 

in Table 4.2 by following the guidance in paragraphs 11.2 to 11.4. 

In addition, the area of openings in the extension should not exceed that given in Table 10.1, if either 

of the following areas are greater than that of the existing building. 

a.  Window and pedestrian doors as a percentage of exposed wall. 

b.  Rooflights as a percentage of area of roof. 

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

R23(2), L1(a)Building type

Residential buildings where people 

temporarily or permanently reside

Places of assembly, offices and shops

Industrial and storage buildings

Windows and pedestrian doors 

as  of exposed wall

Rooflights as  of area of roof

NOTE: Vehicle access doors, display windows and similar glazing and smoke vents can be as large 

an area of wall or roof as required for the purpose.

10.10 As an alternative approach to paragraph 10.9, the areaweighted Uvalue of all thermal elements in 

the extension should be shown to not exceed the areaweighted Uvalue of an extension of the 

same size and shape that complies with paragraph 10.9. This includes the opening area standards in 

Table 10.1. 

The areaweighted Uvalue is given by the following expression.

(U1  A1)  (U2  A2)  (U3  A3)  

(A1  A2  A3  )

Where:

U1  the Uvalue of element type 1

A1  the area of element type 1

and so on.

10.11  As an alternative approach to paragraphs 10.9 or 10.10, an approved calculation tool may be used to 

demonstrate that the building primary energy rate and the building emission rate for the building 

and proposed extension do not exceed those for the building plus a notional extension. The 

notional extension should be the same size and shape as the proposed extension and comply with 

paragraph 10.9.

All calculations should include all consequential improvements that may apply. 

72  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R23(2), L1(a)Table 10.1  Maximum area of openings in the extension 

Conservatories and porches

10.12 A conservatory or porch must have thermal separation from the existing building. If the thermal 

separation is removed or the existing buildings heating system is extended into the conservatory 

or porch, the conservatory or porch should be treated as an extension and paragraphs 10.6 to 10.11 

should be followed. 

10.13 If the conservatory or porch has thermal separation from the existing building, and the existing 

buildings heating system does not extend into it, and is not exempt from the energy efficiency 

requirements because of its size or another reason outlined in paragraph 0.18, all the following 

elements should meet the minimum standards in Table 4.1.

a.  New thermal elements. 

b.  Replacement thermal elements. 

c.  New windows, roof windows, rooflights and doors. The limitations on area of windows, doors 

and rooflights in paragraph 10.9 do not apply. 

In addition, both of the following should apply. 

a.  Any walls, doors and windows should be insulated and draughtproofed to at least the same 

extent as in the existing building.

b.  Fixed building services and/or onsite electricity generation within the conservatory or porch 

should both: 

i.  meet the standards in Sections 5 and 6 

ii.  have independent temperature and on/off controls. 

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

R23(2), L1(a)Regulation 23(1) and requirement L1(a): 

Renovating elements and limiting heat gains 

and losses

This section deals with the requirements of regulation 23(1) and Part L1(a) of Schedule 1 to the Building 

Regulations 2010.

Regulation

Requirements for the renovation or replacement of thermal elements

23.   (1)   Where the renovation of an individual thermal element

(a)   constitutes a major renovation; or

(b)   amounts to the renovation of more than 50 of the elements surface area;

 the renovation must be carried out so as to ensure that the whole of the element complies with paragraph 

L1(a)(i) of Schedule 1, in so far as that is technically, functionally and economically feasible.

Limits on application

Requirement

Requirement

Schedule 1  Part L Conservation of fuel and power

 Reasonable provision shall be made for the 

conservation of fuel and power in buildings by: 

  (a)  limiting heat gains and losses

(i)   through thermal elements and other parts 

of the building fabric; and

(ii)   from pipes, ducts and vessels used for 

space heating, space cooling and hot water 

services; 

  (b)  providing fixed building services which

(i)  are energy efficient to a reasonable standard;

(ii)  have effective controls; and

(iii)  are commissioned by testing and adjusting 

as necessary to ensure they use no more 

fuel and power than is reasonable in the 

circumstances.

Intention

In the Secretary of States view, the requirements of regulation 23(1) and requirement L1(a) are met for 

work to elements in existing buildings by renovating a thermal element to the standards in Section 11. 

74  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R23(1), L1(a) 

Regulations 6 and 22: Material change of use 

and change to energy status

This section deals with the requirements of regulations 6 and 22 of the Building Regulations 2010.

Regulation

Requirements relating to material change of use

6.    (1)   Where there is a material change of use of the whole of a building, such work, if any, shall be carried out 

as is necessary to ensure that the building complies with the applicable requirements of the following 

paragraphs of Schedule 1

(a)   in all cases, B1 (means of warning and escape) 

B2 (internal fire spreadlinings) 

B3 (internal fire spreadstructure) 

B4(2) (external fire spreadroofs) 

B5 (access and facilities for the fire service) 

C2(c) (interstitial and surface condensation) 

F1 (ventilation) 

G1 (cold water supply) 

G3(1) to (3) (hot water supply and systems) 

G4 (sanitary conveniences and washing facilities) 

G5 (bathrooms) 

G6 (kitchens and food preparation areas) 

H1 (foul water drainage) 

H6 (solid waste storage) 

J1 to J4 (combustion appliances) 

L1 (conservation of fuel and power) 

P1 (electrical safety); 

S2 (infrastructure for the charging of electric vehicles);

(b)  in the case of a material change of use described in regulation 5(c), (d), (e) or (f), A1 to A3 (structure);

(c)  in the case of a building exceeding fifteen metres in height, B4(1) (external fire spreadwalls);

(d)   in the case of a material change of use described in regulation 5(a), (b), (c), (d), (g), (h), (i) or, where the 

material change provides new residential accommodation, (f), C1(2) (resistance to contaminants);

(e)  in the case of a material change of use described in regulation 5(a), C2 (resistance to moisture);

(f)   in the case of a material change of use described in regulation 5(a), (b), (c), (g), (h) or (i), E1 to E3 

(resistance to the passage of sound);

(g)   in the case of a material change of use described in regulation 5(e), where the public building consists of 

or contains a school, E4 (acoustic conditions in schools);

(h)   in the case of a material change of use described in regulation 5(a) or (b), G2 (water efficiency) and G3(4) 

(hot water supply and systems: hot water supply to fixed baths);

(i)   in the case of a material change of use described in regulation 5(c), (d), (e) or (j), M1 (access to and use of 

buildings other than dwellings);

(j)  in the case of a material change of use described in regulation 5(a), (b) or (g), Q1 (security).

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

R6, R22 

Regulation continued

  (2)   Where there is a material change of use of part only of a building, such work, if any, shall be carried out as 

is necessary to ensure that

(a)   that part complies in all cases with any applicable requirements referred to in paragraph (1)(a);

(b)   in a case in which subparagraphs (b), (e), (f), (g) or (h) of paragraph (1) apply, that part complies with the 

requirements referred to in the relevant subparagraph;

(c)   in a case to which subparagraph (c) of paragraph (1) applies, the whole building complies with the 

requirement referred to in that subparagraph; 

(d)  in a case to which subparagraph (i) of paragraph (1) applies

(i)   that part and any sanitary conveniences provided in or in connection with that part comply with the 

requirements referred to in that subparagraph; and

(ii)   the building complies with requirement M1(a) of Schedule 1 to the extent that reasonable provision 

is made to provide either suitable independent access to that part or suitable access through the 

building to that part;

(e)   in a case to which subparagraph (j) applies in respect of a material change of use described in regulation 

5(b) or (g), that part complies with the requirement referred to in that subparagraph.

  (3)   Subject to paragraph (4), where there is a material change of use described in regulation 5(k), such work, if 

any, shall be carried out as is necessary to ensure that any external wall, or specified attachment, of the 

building only contains materials of European Classification A2s1, d0 or A1, classified in accordance with 

BS EN 135011:2007A1:2009 entitled Fire classification of construction products and building elements. 

Classification using test data from reaction to fire tests (ISBN 978 0 580 59861 6) published by the British 

Standards Institution on 30th March 2007 and amended in November 2009.

  (4)   Paragraph (3) does not apply to the items listed in regulation 7(3).

Requirements relating to a change to energy status

22.    Where there is a change to a buildings energy status, such work, if any, shall be carried out as is necessary to 

ensure that the building complies with the applicable requirements of Part L of Schedule 1.

Intention 

Regulations 6 and 22 of the Building Regulations set requirements for buildings to comply  

with Schedule 1 to the Building Regulations when a material change of use or a change to energy 

status occurs. 

In the Secretary of States view, the requirements of regulations 6 and 22 are met by following the 

guidance in Section 11. 

76  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R6, R22 

R6, R22, R23(1), L1(a)

Section 11: Work to fabric elements in existing 

buildings

General

11.1  This section provides guidance for work to fabric elements in existing buildings, including all of the 

following types of work.

a.  Renovating an existing thermal element in an existing building  follow paragraphs 11.2 to 11.4. 

b.  Making a material change of use to a building  follow paragraphs 11.5 to 11.8.

c.  Making a change to a building that constitutes a change to energy status  follow paragraphs 11.6 

to 11.8.

NOTE: For new and replacement elements in existing buildings, the guidance in Section 10 should 

be followed. 

Renovating thermal elements 

11.2  Renovation of a thermal element means one of the following.

a.  Providing a new layer through cladding or rendering the external surface of the thermal element. 

b.  Providing a new layer through drylining the internal surface of a thermal element. 

c.  Replacing an existing layer through stripping down the element to expose basic structural 

components (e.g. bricks, blocks, rafters, joists, frame) and then rebuilding. 

d.  Replacing the waterproof membrane on a flat roof.

e.  Providing cavity wall insulation.

11.3  If a thermal element is renovated and one of the following applies, then the whole of the thermal 

element should be improved to achieve at least the Uvalue in Table 4.2 column (b). 

a.  More than 50 of the surface of the individual thermal element is renovated (see paragraph 11.4). 

b.  The work constitutes a major renovation. A major renovation is when more than 25 of the 

surface area of the external building envelope is renovated. 

11.4  When assessing the percentage area that will be renovated of an individual thermal element, 

consider whether the element is being renovated from the outside or inside, following Diagram 11.1 

and Diagram 11.2, respectively.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

For example, if external render is being removed from the outer side of a wall, the area of the thermal element is the area of 

the elevation in which that wall sits.

Area of the thermal 

element being renovated

Total area of the 

thermal element

Diagram 11.1 

 Renovation of a thermal element from the outside

For example, if plaster is being removed from the inner side of a wall, the area of the thermal element is the area of external wall 

as viewed from inside the room. 

Area of the thermal 

element being renovated

Total area of the 

thermal element

Diagram 11.2   Renovation of a thermal element from the inside

78  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R6, R22R6, R22, R23(1), L1(a)

Material change of use and change to energy status 

11.5  A material change of use, in relation to buildings other than dwellings, is when a building satisfies 

any of the following: 

is used as a hotel or a boarding house, where previously it was not

is used as an institution, where previously it was not

is used as a public building, where previously it was not 

d.  is not described in classes 1 to 6 in Schedule 2, where previously it was 

e.  contains a room for residential purposes, where previously it did not 

f.  contains at least one room for residential purposes, having previously had a greater or lesser 

number of rooms for residential purposes

is used as a shop where previously it was not.

11.6  A change to energy status is when a building was previously exempt from the energy efficiency 

requirements but now is not. The change to energy status applies to the building as a whole or to 

parts of the building that have been designed or altered to be used separately. For example, when a 

previously unheated space becomes part of the heated building.

NOTE: A material change of use may result in a change to energy status. 

11.7  If there is a material change of use and/or a change to energy status, elements should satisfy all of 

the following.

a.  Existing thermal elements should meet the standards as outlined in paragraphs 4.7 to 4.8.  

If both of the following apply to existing windows, roof windows, rooflights and doors 

(controlled fittings), they should be replaced to meet the limiting standards in Table 4.1.

NOTE: This does not apply to display windows or highusage entrance doors. 

i.  They separate a conditioned space from an unconditioned space or the external 

environment. 

ii.  They have a Uvalue higher than either of the following. 

 For windows, roof windows and doors  3.30W/(m2K).

 For rooflights  3.80W/(m2K), calculated by following paragraph 4.4.

In addition, all of the following should be met. 

a.  New or replaced thermal elements should meet the standards in Table 4.1. 

b.  New or replaced windows, roof windows, rooflights and doors (controlled fittings) should meet 

the standards in Table 4.1.

c.  The area of openings in the newly created building should not be more than 25 of the total 

floor area. A larger area of openings may be achieved by following paragraph 11.8. 

d.  Any fixed building services including building automation and control systems and/or onsite 

electricity generation that are provided or extended should meet the standards in Sections 5 

and 6. 

NOTE: Consequential improvements may be required when there is a material change of use or 

change to energy status and Section 12 should be followed. 

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

R6, R22, R23(1), L1(a)

11.8  As an alternative to paragraph 11.7, an approved calculation tool may be used to demonstrate that 

the building primary energy rate and building emission rate from the building after the material 

change of use would be no greater than if the building had been improved following the guidance 

in paragraph 11.7. 

80  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

Regulation 28: Consequential improvements 

to energy performance

This section deals with the requirements of regulation 28 of the Building Regulations 2010.

Regulation

Consequential improvements to energy performance 

(1)   Paragraph (2) applies to an existing building with a total useful floor area over 1,000m2 where the proposed 

building work consists of or includes

(a)  an extension;

(b)  the initial provision of any fixed building services; or

(c)  an increase to the installed capacity of any fixed building services.

(2)   Subject to paragraph (3), where this paragraph applies, such work, if any, shall be carried out as is necessary 

to ensure that the building complies with the requirements of Part L of Schedule 1.

(3)   Nothing in paragraph (2) requires work to be carried out if it is not technically, functionally or economically 

feasible.

NOTE: Where the building control body is an approved inspector, see regulation 20 of the Building 

(Approved Inspectors etc.) Regulations 2010 (as amended).

Intention

In the Secretary of States view, where regulation 28 applies, the requirements of this regulation are 

met for existing buildings with a total useful floor area over 1000m2 by carrying out consequential 

improvements that are technically, functionally and economically feasible, by following the guidance 

in Section 12. 

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

R28 

Section 12: Consequential improvements

12.1  For an existing building with a total useful floor area of over 1000m2, additional work may be 

required to improve the overall energy efficiency of the building if proposed work consists of or 

includes any of the following.

a.  An extension. 

b.  Providing any fixed building service in the building for the first time. 

Increasing the capacity of any fixed building service (which does not include doing so on 

account of renewable technology).

Consequential improvements should be carried out to ensure that the entire building complies 

with Part L of the Building Regulations to the extent that they are technically, functionally and 

economically feasible.

NOTE: If the building already complies with the current requirements of Part L of the Building 

Regulations, consequential improvements are not required. 

12.2  Where work other than the items listed in paragraph 12.1 is planned as part of the principal works, if 

they improve the energy performance of the building, these are consequential improvements. Work 

carried out to compensate for the poorer standard of an extension using the alternative approach 

to demonstrating compliance described in paragraph 10.11 does not count as a consequential 

improvement.

Consequential improvements which apply when extending  

a building

NOTE: A new freestanding building constructed on an existing site is a new building, not an 

extension.

12.3  When an existing building with a total useful floor area of over 1000m2 is being extended or the 

habitable area is being increased, consequential improvements should be installed. The measures 

listed in Appendix D, Table D1, may be considered technically, functionally and economically 

feasible in normal circumstances. 

12.4  For an extension or increase in habitable area, the value of the principal works is used to determine 

the minimum value of the consequential improvement works. The value of the consequential 

improvement works should not be less than 10 of the value of the principal works.

12.5  As part of the initial notice or deposit of plans, a chartered quantity surveyor or other suitably 

qualified person should produce a signed report that establishes the value of the principal works 

and the value of the consequential improvements using prices current at the date when the 

building control body is informed of the proposals.

82  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R28Consequential improvements on installing or extending the 

capacity of fixed building services

NOTE: Increasing the size of central boiler plant to serve a new extension would not generally 

increase the installed capacity of a fixed building service per unit area, unless the heating provision 

in the existing building was also increased at the same time. In these circumstances, paragraph 12.6 

would not apply, but paragraphs 12.3 to 12.5 would continue to apply as a result of the extension.

12.6  If it is proposed to install a fixed building service in an existing building with a total useful 

floor area of over 1000m2, either as a first installation or as an installation that increases the 

installed capacity of a fixed building service per unit area, then both of the following should be 

implemented as consequential improvements.

a.  Make energy efficiency improvements to the fixed building services to meet the requirements of 

Part L, where this is practical and technically, functionally and economically feasible.

i.  When installing or extending the capacity of fixed building services, the value of the 

principal works is used to determine the minimum value of the energy efficiency 

improvements made to fixed building services as consequential improvements. The value of 

these consequential improvements should not be less than 10 of the value of the principal 

works, excluding the value of any work to improve other energy efficiency aspects of the 

building served by the services in meeting paragraph 12.6b.

ii.  The measures listed in Appendix D, Table D1, relate to this requirement, and may be 

considered technically, functionally and economically feasible in normal circumstances. 

iii.  As part of the initial notice or deposit of plans, a chartered quantity surveyor or other 

suitably qualified person should produce a signed report that establishes the value of the 

principal works and the value of the consequential improvements using prices current at the 

date when the building control body is informed of the proposals.

Improve other energy efficiency aspects of those parts of the building served by the fixed 

building service to meet the requirements of Part L, where this is technically, functionally and 

economically feasible.

i.  All technically, functionally and economically feasible measures to improve the fabric of the 

building served by the service should be implemented. The extent of the improvements to 

the fabric should not be determined by the value of the principal works.

ii.  The measures in Appendix D, Table D2 relate to this requirement and may be considered 

technically, functionally and economically feasible in normal circumstances.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

R28Appendix A: Key terms

NOTE: Except for the items marked  (which 

are from the Building Regulations 2010), these 

definitions apply only to Approved Document L, 

Volume 2: Buildings other than dwellings.

Air permeability The measure of airtightness of 

the building fabric. It is defined as the air leakage 

rate per hour per m2 of envelope area at the test 

reference pressure differential of 50Pa. 

 The limiting air permeability is the worst 

allowable air permeability. 

 The design air permeability is the target value 

set at the design stage. 

 The assessed air permeability is the value used 

in establishing the building emission rate and 

the building primary energy rate. The assessed 

air permeability is based on a measurement of 

the air permeability of the building concerned.

Airtightness The resistance of the building 

envelope to infiltration when ventilators are 

closed. The greater the airtightness at a given 

pressure difference across the envelope, the lower 

the infiltration. Building automation and control 

system. 

Building automation and control system A system 

comprising all products, software and engineering 

services that can support energy efficient, 

economical and safe operation of heating, 

ventilation and air conditioning systems through 

automatic controls and by facilitating the manual 

management of those building systems.

Building control body A local authority building 

control department or an approved inspector.

Building emission rate The buildings CO2 emission 

rate expressed as kgCO2/(m2.year).

Building envelope (in relation to a building) 

Defined in regulation 35 as the walls, floor, roof, 

windows, doors, roof windows and rooflights.

Building primary energy rate Expressed as kWhPE/

(m2.year) and determined using the approved 

methodology. 

Centralised electrically heated A domestic hot 

water system in which the water is supplied to 

the drawoff points from a device in which water 

is heated by an electric element or elements 

immersed in the stored water. The water heater 

is situated centrally with a distribution system 

to supply water to the drawoff points and has a 

capacity greater than 300 litres.

Centre pane Uvalue The Uvalue determined 

in the central area of the glazing unit, making no 

allowance for edge spacers or the window frame.

Change to energy status Defined in regulation 

2(1) as any change which results in a building 

becoming a building to which the energy efficiency 

requirements of these Regulations apply, where 

previously it was not.

CHPQA quality index An indicator of the energy 

efficiency and environmental performance of a 

CHP scheme, certified by the Combined Heat and 

Power Quality Assurance scheme.

Circuitwatt Refers to the power consumed in 

lighting circuits by lamps and, where applicable, 

their associated control gear (including 

transformers and drivers) and power factor 

correction equipment. 

Coefficient of performance (COP) A measure 

of the efficiency of a heat pump at specified 

source and sink temperatures, measured using the 

procedures in BS EN 145112.

 Heating COP  heat output / power input

  COP (COP  100) is the heat generator 

efficiency.

84  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

ACommissioning When, after all or part of a fixed 

building service or onsite electricity generation 

system has been installed, replaced or altered, the 

system is taken from a state of static completion 

to working order. Testing and adjusting are carried 

out for fixed building services, as necessary, to 

ensure that the whole system uses no more fuel 

and power than is reasonable in the circumstances. 

Testing and adjusting are carried out for onsite 

electricity generation systems, as necessary, 

to ensure that the whole system produces the 

maximum amount of electricity that is reasonable 

in the circumstances.

For each system, commissioning includes all of the 

following.

 Setting to work.

 Regulation (that is, testing and adjusting 

repetitively) to achieve the specified 

performance.

 Calibration.

 Setting up and testing the associated automatic 

control systems.

 Recording the system settings and the 

performance test results that have been 

accepted as satisfactory.

Community heating system A system that supplies 

heat from a central source within a single building, 

for example to both dwellings and nondwellings 

in a mixeduse building.

Consequential improvements Those energy 

efficiency improvements required by regulation 28. 

Control zone Refers to the independent control 

of rooms or areas within buildings that need to be 

heated to different temperatures at different times.

Controlled service or fitting Defined in regulation 

2(1) as a service or fitting in relation to which 

Part G sanitation, hot water safety and water 

efficiency, H drainage and waste disposal, J 

combustion appliances and fuel storage systems, 

L conservation of fuel and power or P electrical 

safety of Schedule 1 imposes a requirement. 

Directfired circulator A domestic hot water 

system in which the water is supplied to the draw

off points from a hot water vessel in which water is 

heated by combustion gases from a primary energy 

source. The unit has no storage volume, as water is 

stored in a supplementary storage vessel.

Directfired continuous flow A domestic hot 

water system in which the water is supplied to the 

drawoff points from a device in which cold water 

is heated by combustion gases from a primary 

energy source as it flows through the water 

heater. The water heater is close to the drawoff 

points. The unit has no storage volume, as water 

is instantaneously heated as it flows through the 

device.

Directfired storage A domestic hot water system 

in which the water is supplied to the drawoff 

points from an integral hot water vessel in which 

water is heated by combustion gases from a 

primary energy source.

Display lighting Lighting to highlight displays of 

exhibits or merchandise, or lighting used in spaces 

for public leisure and entertainment, such as dance 

halls, auditoria, conference halls, restaurants and 

cinemas.

Display window An area of glazing, including 

glazed doors, to display products or services on 

offer to the public within a building, positioned as 

in all of the following.

 At the external perimeter of the building.

 At an access level.

Immediately adjacent to a pedestrian 

thoroughfare.

If there is a permanent workspace within one 

glazing height of the window, this cannot be 

considered to be a display window. Glazing more 

than 3m above an access level should not be 

considered part of a display window, except where 

either of the following applies.

 The products on display require a greater height 

of glazing.

Building Regulations 2010  

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

AA Building work involves changes to the faade 

and glazing that require planning consent, and 

planning requirements mean that a greater 

height of glazing is necessary, e.g. to fit with 

surrounding buildings or to match the character 

of the existing faade. 

in the case of a certificate entered on the 

register before 9th January 2013 complied 

with the requirements of regulation 11(1) of the 

Energy Performance of Buildings (Certificates 

and Inspections) (England and Wales) 

Regulations 2007;

District heat networks Supply heat from a 

central source to consumers, via a network of 

underground pipes carrying hot water. Heat 

networks can cover a large area or even an entire 

city, or can be relatively local, supplying a small 

cluster of buildings.

Dwelling A selfcontained unit designed to 

accommodate a single household, including a 

dwellinghouse and a flat.

Economically feasible The capital cost of a 

measure will be recouped in energy savings 

within a reasonable time. For the purposes of this 

document, economically feasible means that the 

measure would achieve a simple payback after one 

of the following.

 7 years, for the installation of thermostatic 

controls.

 7 years, for the extension of onsite low and 

zero carbon energygenerating systems which 

are required as consequential improvements (see 

Appendix D, Table D1).

15 years, for any other measure.

Emergency escape lighting The emergency lighting 

that illuminates an area for the safety of people 

leaving that area or for people attempting to stop 

a dangerous process before leaving that area.

Energy efficiency ratio (EER) In chillers, this is 

calculated by dividing the cooling energy delivered 

into the cooling system by the energy input to the 

chiller.

Energy efficiency requirements Defined in 

regulation 2(1) as the requirements of regulations 

23, 25A, 25B, 26, 26A, 26C, 28, 40 and 43 and Part L 

of Schedule 1.

Energy performance certificate Defined in the 

Energy Performance of Buildings (England and 

Wales) Regulation 2012 as a certificate which:

in the case of a certificate entered on the 

register on or after 9th January 2013 complies 

with the requirements of regulation 9(1) of 

these Regulations; or

c.  complies with the requirements of regulation 

29 of the Building Regulations 2010.

Envelope area (the measured part of the building) 

The total area of all floors, walls and ceilings 

bordering the internal volume that is the subject 

of a pressure test. This includes walls and floors 

below external ground level. Overall internal 

dimensions are used to calculate this envelope 

area, and no subtractions are made for the area of 

the junctions of internal walls, floors and ceilings 

with exterior walls, floors and ceilings. 

Existing district heat network A district heat 

network that is either in operation or is under 

construction on 15 June 2022. For these purposes, 

under construction means any of the following. 

 The building to house the energy centre has 

been constructed. 

 There is a heat offtake agreement signed 

between the heat network and a third party. 

 Excavation for pipework has been completed.

Fitout work The work to complete the 

partitioning and building services within the 

external fabric of the building (the shell) to meet 

the specific needs of incoming occupiers. Fitout 

work can be carried out either:

 during the same project and time frame as the 

construction of the building shell

 at a later date, after the shell has been completed.

Fixed building services Defined in regulation 2(1) 

as any part of, or any controls associated with:

a.  fixed internal or external lighting systems (but 

not including emergency escape lighting or 

specialist process lighting); 

b.  fixed systems for heating, hot water, air 

conditioning or mechanical ventilation; or

86  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

86  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

Building Regulations 2010

AAc.  any combination of systems of the kinds 

referred to in paragraph (a) or (b).

Fixed external lighting Lighting fixed to an external 

surface of the building and supplied from the 

occupiers electrical system. It excludes lighting 

in common areas of blocks of flats and in other 

communal accessways.

gvalue A total solar energy transmittance.

Hard water Water which has a high mineral 

content. For the purposes of this approved 

document, hard water is water that has a total 

water hardness of greater than 200ppm of CaCO3.

Heat generator seasonal efficiency The estimated 

seasonal heat output from the heat generator 

divided by the energy input. 

Heating appliance or heat generator The part of 

a heating system that generates useful heat using 

one or more of the following processes. 

 The combustion of fuels in, for example, a 

boiler. 

 The Joule effect, taking place in the heating 

elements of an electric resistance heating 

system.

 Capturing heat from ambient air, ventilation 

exhaust air, or a water or ground heat source 

using a heat pump. 

Heating zone A conditioned area of a building 

which is on a single floor and has the same 

thermal characteristics and temperature control 

requirements throughout.

High excitation purity light sources Colour

tuneable light sources that can be set to at least 

the colours listed in Table A1 and which have for 

each of these colours, measured at the dominant 

wavelength, the minimum excitation purity shown. 

Intended for use in applications requiring high 

quality coloured light.

Colour

Green

Dominant 

wavelength (nm)

Minimum excitation  

of purity ()

440490

520570

610670

Highusage entrance door A door to an entrance 

primarily for people, through which many 

people are expected to move. Robustness and/

or powered operation are the main performance 

requirements. A highusage entrance door will have 

automatic closers and, except where operational 

requirements preclude it, be protected by a lobby.

Indirectfired circulator A domestic hot water system 

in which the water is supplied to the drawoff points 

from a device in which water is heated by an element 

through which the heating medium is circulated so as 

not to mix with the hot water supply. In practice, the 

heat source is likely to be a boiler dedicated to the 

supply of domestic hot water.

Installed capacity of a fixed building service per 

unit area The design output of the distribution 

system output devices (the terminal units) serving 

the space in question, divided by the total useful 

floor area of that space.

Instantaneous electrically heated A domestic hot 

water system in which the water is supplied to the 

drawoff points from a device in which cold water 

is heated by an electric element or elements as it 

flows through the water heater. The water heater 

is close to the drawoff points. The unit has no 

storage volume, as water is instantaneously heated 

as it flows through the device.

Light source lumens The sum of the average initial 

(100 hour) lumen output of all the light sources 

in a luminaire. Does not include any losses or 

inefficiencies of the luminaire.

Lighting Energy Numeric Indicator (LENI) A 

measure of the performance of lighting in terms 

of energy per square metre per year (kWh/m2 per 

year). See Appendix B.

Local electrically heated A domestic hot water 

system in which the water is supplied to the draw

off points from a device in which water is heated 

by an electric element or elements immersed in 

the stored water. The water heater is near the 

drawoff points and has a storage capacity of 

between 100 and 300 litres.

Building Regulations 2010  

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

AATable A1  High excitation purity light sourcesLuminaire lumens Equal to (light source lumens 

 light output ratio) and represents the output of 

the luminaire. Light output ratio (LOR) is the ratio 

of the output of the luminaire at stated practical 

conditions to that of the lamp(s) contained in the 

luminaire under reference conditions.

Major renovation Defined in regulation 35 as 

the renovation of a building where more than 

25 of the surface area of the building envelope 

undergoes renovation.

Material change of use Defined in regulation 5 as: 

Where there is a change in the purposes for which 

or the circumstances in which a building is used, so 

that after that change:

a.  the building is used as a dwelling, where 

previously it was not;

b.  the building contains a flat, where previously it 

did not; 

c.  the building is used as an hotel or a boarding 

house, where previously it was not;

d.  the building is used as an institution, where 

previously it was not;

e.  the building is used as a public building, where 

previously it was not;

the building is not a building described in 

classes 1 to 6 in Schedule 2, where previously it 

g.  the building, which contains at least one 

dwelling, contains a greater or lesser number of 

dwellings than it did previously;

h.  the building contains a room for residential 

purposes, where previously it did not;

the building, which contains at least one room 

for residential purposes, contains a greater 

or lesser number of such rooms than it did 

previously; 

the building is used as a shop, where it 

previously was not; or

k.  the building is a building described in regulation 

7(4)(a), where previously it was not.

Modulating burner control A type of boiler 

control that provides a continuously variable firing 

rate that is altered to match the boiler load over 

the whole turndown ratio. 

Optimum start A control system or algorithm that 

starts plant operating at the latest time possible 

to achieve specified conditions at the start of the 

occupancy period.

Optimum stop A control system or algorithm that 

stops plant operating at the earliest time possible 

so that internal conditions will not deteriorate 

beyond present limits by the end of the occupancy 

period.

Part load energy efficiency ratio A ratio calculated 

by dividing the cooling energy delivered into 

the cooling system by the energy input to the 

cooling plant. Part load performance for individual 

chillers is determined assuming that chilled water 

is provided at 7C out and 12C in (at 100 load), 

under the conditions detailed in Table A2. 

Percentage part load

Aircooled chillers 

ambient air temperature 

Watercooled chillers 

entering cooling water 

temperature (C)

Pointofuse electrically heated A domestic hot 

water system in which the water is supplied to 

the drawoff points from a device in which water 

is heated by an electric element or elements 

immersed in the stored water. The water heater 

is close to the drawoff points and has a storage 

capacity no greater than 100 litres.

Power efficiency The total annual power output of 

a CHP unit divided by its total annual fuel input.

Primary energy Energy, from renewable and non

renewable sources, that has not undergone any 

conversion or transformation process. 

88  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

88  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

Building Regulations 2010

AATable A2  Partial load efficiency ratioPrincipal works The work necessary to achieve the 

clients purposes in extending the building and/

or increasing the installed capacity of any fixed 

building services. The value of the principal works 

is the basis for determining a reasonable provision 

for some consequential improvements. 

Renewable technology Technology that uses 

renewable resources, which are naturally 

replenished on a human timescale, to produce 

electricity. Resources include wind, wave, marine, 

hydro, biomass and solar.

Rooflight A glazed unit installed out of plane with 

the surface of the roof on a kerb or upstand. Also 

sometimes referred to as a skylight.

Roof window A window installed in the same 

orientation as, and in plane with, the surrounding 

roof. 

Room for residential purposes Defined in 

regulation 2(1) as a room, or a suite of rooms, 

which is not a dwellinghouse or a flat and which 

is used by one or more persons to live and sleep 

and includes a room in a hostel, an hotel, a 

boarding house, a hall of residence or a residential 

home, but does not include a room in a hospital, 

or other similar establishment, used for patient 

accommodation. 

Seasonal coefficient of performance (SCOP) A 

measure of the efficiency of a heat pump over the 

designated heating season, measured using the 

procedures in BS EN 14825.

Seasonal energy efficiency ratio (SEER) The total 

amount of cooling energy provided by a single 

cooling unit over a year, divided by the total 

energy input to that single cooling unit over the 

same year. 

Sequence control Enables two or more heating 

boilers to be switched on or off in sequence when 

the heating load changes. 

Simple payback The amount of time it will take 

to recover the initial investment through energy 

savings, calculated by dividing the marginal 

additional cost of implementing an energy 

efficiency measure by the value of the annual 

energy savings achieved by that measure, taking no 

account of VAT. The following guidance should be 

used.

 The marginal additional cost is the additional 

cost (materials and labour) of incorporating, for 

example, additional insulation  not the whole 

cost of the work.

 The cost of implementing the measure should 

be based on prices current at the date when 

the application is made to the building control 

body and be confirmed in a report signed by a 

suitably qualified person.

 The annual energy savings should be estimated 

using the National Calculation Methodology 

Modelling Guide.

 The energy prices that are current when the 

application is made to the building control body 

should be used when evaluating energy savings. 

Current prices are given on the BEIS website, at: 

https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/

quarterlyenergyprices.

Simplified building energy model One of the 

current approved procedures for assessing the 

performance of a building, in line with this 

document. 

Specialist process lighting Lighting to illuminate 

specialist tasks within a space rather than the 

space itself. Specialist process lighting includes 

theatre spotlights, projection equipment, 

lighting in TV and photographic studios, medical 

lighting in operating theatres and doctors and 

dentists surgeries, illuminated signs, coloured or 

stroboscopic lighting, and art objects with integral 

lighting, such as sculptures, decorative fountains 

and chandeliers.

Standard Assessment Procedure The current 

approved procedure for assessing the performance 

of dwellings in line with Approved Document L, 

Volume 1: Dwellings. The Standard Assessment 

Procedure is detailed in The Governments 

Standard Assessment Procedure for Energy Rating 

of Dwellings version 10.

Target emission rate The maximum CO2 emission 

rate for the building, expressed as kgCO2/(m2.year).

Target primary energy rate The maximum primary 

energy use for the building in a year, expressed as 

kWhPE/(m2.year).

Building Regulations 2010  

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

AAThermal bridging Occurs when part of a thermal 

element has significantly higher heat transfer than 

the materials surrounding it. 

Thermal element Defined in regulation 2(3) and 2(4)  

as follows.

2(3) In these Regulations thermal element 

means a wall, floor or roof (but does not include 

windows, doors, roof windows or rooflights) 

which separates a thermally conditioned part of 

the building (the conditioned space) from

a.  the external environment (including the 

ground); or 

in the case of floors and walls, another part of 

the building which is 

i.  unconditioned; 

ii.  an extension falling within class 7 of 

Schedule 2; or

iii.  where this paragraph applies, conditioned 

to a different temperature,

and includes all parts of the element between the 

surface bounding the conditioned space and the 

external environment or other part of the building 

as the case may be. 

2(4) Paragraph 2(3)(b)(iii) only applies to a building 

which is not a dwelling, where the other part of 

the building is used for a purpose which is not 

similar or identical to the purpose for which the 

conditioned space is used. 

Thermal envelope The combination of thermal 

elements of a building that enclose a particular 

conditioned indoor space or groups of indoor spaces.

Thermal separation Occurs where a building and a 

conservatory or porch are divided by walls, floors, 

windows and doors to which one of the following 

applies.

 The Uvalues are similar to, or in the case of a 

newly constructed conservatory or porch not 

exceeding, the Uvalues of the corresponding 

exposed elements elsewhere in the building.

In the case of a newly constructed conservatory 

or porch, windows and doors have similar 

draughtproofing provisions as the exposed 

windows and doors elsewhere in the building.

Thermostatic room controls A device or system 

that automatically controls the output of 

heating and/or cooling emitters to control the 

temperature in each room (or, where justified, a 

heating zone) independently where heating and/or 

cooling is provided by a fixed building service.

Total useful floor area The total area of all 

enclosed spaces, measured to the internal face of 

the external walls. When calculating total useful 

floor area, both of the following should be taken 

into account.

 The area of sloping surfaces such as staircases, 

galleries, raked auditoria and tiered terraces 

should be taken as their area on plan.

 Areas that are not enclosed, such as open 

floors, covered ways and balconies, should be 

excluded.

NOTE: This area is the gross internal floor area 

as measured in accordance with the Code of 

Measuring Practice by the Royal Institution of 

Chartered Surveyors (RICS). 

Uvalue A measure of the ability of a building 

element or component to conduct heat from a 

warmer environment to a cooler environment. 

It is expressed as the quantity of heat (in watts) 

that will flow through 1m2 of area divided by the 

difference in temperature (in degrees K) between 

the internal and external environment. The unit is 

W/(m2K).

Weather compensation A system which enables 

the operating flow temperature of a heating system 

to be varied. An external sensor communicates 

with one inside the boiler. The temperature is 

varied by either of the following.

 Modulating the heat generator output (direct 

acting).

 Using a mixing valve to adjust the flow 

temperature to the heat emitters. 

Wet heating system When a heating appliance 

(usually a boiler) produces hot water which is 

distributed around the building to heat emitters.  

90  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

90  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

Building Regulations 2010

AAAppendix B: Lighting Energy Numeric Indicator 

(LENI)

B1  The Lighting Energy Numeric Indicator (LENI) method is an alternative approach for complying with 

the standards for lighting given in Section 6 of this approved document.

B2  The LENI should not exceed the lighting energy limit specified in Table B1 for a given illuminance 

and number of hours run.

Step 1: Determine the lighting energy limit from Table B1. 

If display lighting is used, the lighting energy limit may be increased by the value given for normal 

display lighting for the area of the room where display lighting is used. 

Step 2: Calculate the parasitic energy use (Ep). If the parasitic energy use is unknown, an allowance 

of 0.3W/m2 should be made for any control system. If no lighting control system is used, then Ep  0. 

Step 3: Determine the total power of lighting (Pl). 

Step 4: Determine the occupancy factor (Fo). If no automatic control is used, then Fo  1. If controls 

turn off the lights within 20 minutes of the room being empty, then Fo  0.8. 

Step 5: Determine the factor for daylight (Fd). If no daylightlinked dimming system is used, then Fd 

 1. If the electric lighting dims in response to daylight being available, then in areas with adequate 

daylight Fd  0.8. This may be taken as all areas within 6m of a window wall or in areas where 10 

or more of the roof is translucent or made up of rooflights. 

Step 6: Determine the constant illuminance factor (Fc). Systems that control the lighting in this 

way have Fc  0.9, and those that do not have Fc  1. 

Step 7: Calculate the daytime energy use (Ed). 

The daytime energy use is:

Ed() 

Pl Fo Fd Fc Td

Step 8: Calculate the nighttime energy use (En).

The nighttime energy use is: 

En() 

Pl Fo Fc Tn

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

BStep 9: Calculate total energy (kWh) per square metre per year (LENI). 

The total energy per square metre per year is the sum of the daytime, nighttime and parasitic 

energy uses per year divided by the area (A), as set out in the formula below.

LENI () 

Ep Ed En

Hours

Illuminance (lux)

Display lighting

Total

Night

Normal

window

12.59

12.33

17.98

10.10

15.85

23.40

12.23

19.41

28.85

14.41

23.04

34.36

10.42

17.59

28.27

42.22

12.33

20.95

33.73

50.27

15.32

26.16

42.02

62.24

12.19

18.73

31.99

51.06

74.87

14.33

18.99

28.89

48.85

76.21

108.14

11.00

13.50

16.00

21.90

24.20

48.18

92  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

92  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

Building Regulations 2010

ABTable B1  Recommended maximum LENI (kWh per square metre per year) in new and existing buildingsAppendix C: Reporting evidence of compliance

BRUKL report

C1  The Building Regulations UK Part L (BRUKL) report should be provided to the building control 

body and to the building owner to show that building work complies with the energy efficiency 

requirements. 

C2  The Simplified Building Energy Model (SBEM) will produce the BRUKL report for the building as a 

standard output option.

C3  Two versions of the BRUKL report should be produced, using the approved software.

a.  The first, the design stage BRUKL report, before works begin, to include all of the following.

i.  The target primary energy rate and building primary energy rate.

ii.  The target emission rate and building emission rate.

iii.  A supporting list of specifications.

b.  The second, the asbuilt BRUKL report, to include all of the following.

i.  The target primary energy rate and asbuilt building primary energy rate.

ii.  The target emission rate and asbuilt building emission rate.

iii.  A supporting list of specifications and any changes to the list of specifications that was 

provided at design stage.

The building control body can then use these reports to help check that what was designed has been 

built. The software includes a facility to compare the design stage and asbuilt data input files and 

automatically produces a schedule of changes.

C4  The asbuilt BRUKL report should be signed by the energy assessor to confirm that the asbuilt 

calculations are accurate.

C5  The asbuilt BRUKL report must be signed by the client (usually the developer or housebuilder) to 

confirm that the building has been constructed or completed according to the specifications in the 

report.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

CAppendix D: Measures for consequential 

improvements 

D1  For an existing building with a total useful floor area of over 1000m2, additional work may be 

required to improve the overall energy efficiency of the building if proposed work consists of or 

includes any of the following.

a.  An extension. 

b.  Providing any fixed building service in the building for the first time. 

Increasing the capacity of any fixed building service (which does not include doing so on 

account of renewable technology).

D2  Additional works to improve energy efficiency as required in these circumstances are known as 

consequential improvements and are described in detail in Section 12.

Measures usually to be installed whenever consequential improvements are 

required

D3  Energy efficiency improvements to the building are required whenever consequential improvements 

apply. All technically, functionally and economically feasible measures should be implemented, with 

the requirement for consequential improvements being met based on the value of the principal 

works in some circumstances. This is outlined in Section 12. 

D4  The energy efficiency improvements in Table D1 can be considered technically, functionally and 

economically feasible in normal circumstances. As such, these measures should usually be installed 

when consequential improvements are required. These should be installed at least to the extent 

outlined in Table D1, based on the value of the principal works, as outlined in Section 12.

94  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

DItem

Improvement measure

Upgrading heating systems that are more than 15 years old by providing new plant or improved controls.

Upgrading cooling systems that are more than 15 years old by providing new plant or improved controls.

Upgrading airhandling systems that are more than 15 years old by providing new plant or improved controls.

Upgrading general lighting systems that have an average lamp efficacy of less than 60 light source lumens 

per circuitwatt and that serve areas greater than 100m2 by providing new luminaires and/or controls 

following the guidance in Section 6.

Installing energy metering following the guidance given in CIBSEs TM39.

Upgrading thermal elements that have Uvalues higher than those in Table 4.2, column (a), following the 

guidance in paragraphs 4.7 and 4.8.

Replacing existing windows, roof windows or rooflights (but excluding display windows) or doors (but 

excluding highusage entrance doors) that have a Uvalue higher than the following.

a.  For windows, roof windows and doors  3.30W/(m2K)

b.  For rooflights  3.80W/(m2K), calculated by following paragraph 4.4.

If existing onsite low and zero carbon energygenerating systems provide less than 10 of onsite energy 

demand: increasing the capacity of onsite systems, provided the increase will achieve a simple payback of 7 

years or less.

Measures specified in the recommendations report that accompanies a valid energy performance certificate 

which will achieve a simple payback of 15 years or less.

NOTE:

Items 1 to 7 usually meet the economic feasibility criterion of a simple payback of 15 years. A shorter simple payback 

period of 7 years is given for item 8 because such measures are likely to be more capital intensive or more risky than 

the others.

Additional measures usually to be installed when consequential improvements 

are required following changes to fixed building service provision

D5  When consequential improvements apply as a result of providing a fixed building service in the 

building for the first time or increasing the capacity of an existing fixed building service, additional 

energy efficiency improvements to those parts of the building served by the service should be 

made. The extent of these measures should not be based on the value of the principal works, as 

outlined in Section 12. All technically, functionally and economically feasible measures to improve 

the parts of the building served by the service to meet the requirements of Part L should be 

implemented.

D6  The measures in Table D2 improve the energy efficiency of those parts of the building served by 

the service, and can be considered technically, functionally and economically feasible in normal 

circumstances whenever these additional measures are required.

Building Regulations 2010  

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

ADTable D1  Energy efficiency measures which should usually be installed whenever consequential improvements are requiredThese measures are considered technically, functionally and economically feasible in normal circumstances. These measures should be installed at least to the extent outlined to meet the reasonable provision criterion, based on the value of the principal works, as outlined in Section 12.Item

Improvement measure

If the installed capacity per unit area of a heating system is increased, both of the following apply.

a.  Thermal elements within the area served that have Uvalues higher than those in Table 4.2, column (a), 

should be replaced or renovated following the guidance in Section 10 or Section 11 of this approved 

document.

b.  Existing windows, roof windows or rooflights (but excluding display windows) or doors (but excluding 

highusage entrance doors) within the area served should be replaced in line with the guidance in 

Section 10 if they have Uvalues higher than:

for windows, roof windows and doors  3.30W/(m2K)

for rooflights  3.80W/(m2K), calculated by following paragraph 4.4.

If the areaweighted installed capacity of a cooling system will be increased, both of the following apply.

a.  Thermal elements within heated areas served that have Uvalues higher than those set out in Table 4.2, 

column (a), should be replaced or renovated following the guidance in Section 10 or Section 11 of this 

approved document.

b.  The solar control provisions should be upgraded if either of the following criteria is met.

i.  The area of windows and roof windows (but excluding display windows) within the area served 

exceeds 40 of the faade area. 

ii.  Both:

the area of rooflights exceeds 20 of the area of the roof, and

the design solar load exceeds 25W/m2.

The upgraded system should meet at least one of the following four criteria.

iii.  The solar gain per unit floor area averaged over the period 06:30 to 16:30 GMT, and when the building 

is subject to solar irradiances for July as given in the table of design irradiancies in CIBSEs Guide A, 

should not be greater than 25W/m2.

iv.  The design solar load should be reduced by at least 20.

v.  The effective gvalue should be no worse than 0.3.

vi.  The zone or zones should satisfy the solar gain check in paragraphs 4.16 to 4.18.

Any general lighting system within the area served by the relevant fixed building service that has an average 

efficacy of less than 60 light source lumens per circuitwatt should be upgraded with new luminaires and/or 

controls following the guidance in Section 6.

96  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

96  Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

Building Regulations 2010

ADTable D2  Additional energy efficiency measures which should usually be installed whenever consequential improvements apply as a result of:  the provision of a fixed building service in the building for the first time, or   increasing the capacity of any fixed building serviceThese measures are considered technically, functionally and economically feasible in normal circumstances.The extent of these measures should not be based on the value of the principal works, as outlined in Section 12, and should be installed in so far as they are technically, functionally and economically feasible. Appendix E: Hierarchy for establishing 

seasonal efficiencies of existing boilers

E1  When a heating system is being replaced in an existing building, paragraph 5.4 should be followed. 

The seasonal efficiency of the appliance being replaced, if unknown, should be established by 

following the hierarchy set out below. This is based upon the Non Domestic EPC Conventions for 

England  Wales Issue 7.1.

1.  Use Energy Technology List (ETL) product list part load values at 30 and 100 load. 

2.  Use current Product Characteristics Database (PCDB) values where available. 

3.  Use either manufacturers information or boiler plate information or information from a 

manufacturers technical helpdesk. Where a gross efficiency value is established for a non

condensing boiler then a deduction of 0.05 (i.e. 5) should be made to convert it to an 

appropriate seasonal efficiency. 

4.  Use SAP 10 tables (up to 70kW output). 

5.  Use suitable SBEM defaults. 

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 2, 2021 edition 

E

