This Decree also applies to the repair and alteration work of an administrative, service, office, 

business, warehouse and production building and common spaces of a multistorey residential 

building, extension or increasing the gross floor area of such a building, and alteration of the 

intended use of a building for administrative, service, office, business or residential use subject 

to permit under section 125 of the Land Use and Building Act, to the extent that improving 

accessibility  is appropriate  considering  the  attributes of  the  building  as  well  as the type  and 

scope of the measure.


Section 2 Passageway leading to a building. 

There shall be an easily noticeable passageway with a width of at least 1,200 millimetres and 

a smooth, hard and nonslippery surface that leads to the building from the boundary of the plot 

or building site and from the space and area that serve the use of the building.


The gradient of 

the passageway located in an outdoor space may not exceed five per cent.


If there are steps on 

the passageway, there shall also be a ramp or a permanently installed device intended for lifting 

persons that is suitable for a user of a wheelchair and walking frame with wheels.


The  ramp  referred  to  in  subsection  1  above  shall  be  easily  noticeable  and  straight  with  a 

smooth, hard and nonslippery surface, width of at least 900 millimetres and, if the ramp is not 

connected to a fixed structure, a protective edge of at least 50 millimetres in height.


There shall 

be a horizontal landing with a length of at least 1,500 millimetres at the lower and upper end of 

the ramp.


The gradient of the ramp may not exceed five per cent.


However, if the elevation 

Directive 2015/1535/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (32015L1535); OJ L 241, 17.9.2015, p. 1 

difference is no more than 1,000 millimetres, the ramp may not have a gradient of more than 

eight per cent.


In that case, the elevation difference of a continuous ramp may not be more than 

500 millimetres, after which there shall be a horizontal intermediate landing with a length of at 

least 2,000 millimetres.


However, in an outdoor area the ramp may have a gradient of more than 

five  per  cent  only  if  it  can  be  kept  in  a  condition  comparable  with  that  of  an  indoor  ramp.


If parking spaces are provided for a building, an adequate number of them, but at least one, 

shall  be  intended  for  the  use  of  a  person  with  mobility  and  functional  impairment.


Such  a 

parking space shall have a width of at least 3,600 millimetres and a length of at least 5,000 

millimetres  and  be  marked  with  the  International  Symbol  of  Access.


Section 3 Entrance to a building. 

The distance of the opening side of the outside door of a building from the inside corner of 

the wall or other fixed obstacle outside the door shall be at least 400 millimetres.


The landing in front of the outside door shall be at least 1,500 millimetres wide and at least 

1,500 millimetres long.


Section 4 Doors. 

The clear width of the door and opening in a passageway inside a building, the door leading 

from the staircase to a dwelling and the door of the space referred to in section 9, subsection 2 

and section 10 shall be at least 850 millimetres.


The clear width of the door and opening leading to room spaces of a nonresidential building 

as well as to residential rooms of a residential building, necessary spaces serving residence and 

spaces serving the use of the building shall be at least 800 millimetres.


In  that  case  the 

threshold or level difference may not be higher than 20 millimetres and the threshold shall be 

designed so that it can be easily crossed with a wheelchair or walking frame with wheels.


In 

connection  with  the  door  of  an  outside  space  of  an  individual  dwelling  the  level  difference 

outside the door may be more than 20 millimetres if the level difference can, with reasonable 

effort,  be  eliminated  with equipment in  the  outdoor  space.


The outside door of a building and the door of a space serving the use of the building shall 

function so that it is easy to open by a person with mobility and functional impairment.


Section 5 Passageway inside a building. 

Passageway inside a nonresidential building and common spaces of a residential building 

shall be easily noticeable and have a smooth and nonslippery surface.


If the passageway referred to in subsection 1 has a width of less than 1,500 millimetres, the 

passageway shall have a turning space with a diameter of at least 1,500 millimetres at least every 

15 metres.


Section 6 Other spaces in a building. 

Spaces of a nonresidential building and common spaces of a residential building as well as 

the fixtures, fittings and fixed equipment in them shall be suitable for persons with mobility and 

functional impairment.


A residential building that under section 7 shall in addition to stairs be equipped with a lift 

shall  have  a  turning  space  with  a  diameter  of  at  least  1,300  millimetres  in  the  hallway  and 

kitchen of the dwelling.


A dwelling that is intended for service housing or supported housing of a person with mobility 

and functional impairment shall, irrespective of the number of storeys in the building, have a 

turning  space  with  a  diameter  of  at  least  1,500  millimetres  in  the  hallway  and  kitchen.


The 

dimensions  of  the  dwelling  shall  also  in  other  respects  be  such  that  they  enable  the  use  of 

assistive devices and the provision of assistance.


Section 7 Connection between different levels in a residential building. 

In  addition  to  stairs,  a  residential  building  shall  also  be  equipped  with  a  lift  if  entry  to  a 

dwelling in the building is on the third floor or higher, the entrance floor level included.


The lift shall provide access to the entrance level and each level with entry to a dwelling or a 

space serving the use of the building.


The cabin of the lift referred to in subsection 1 above shall be at least 1,100 millimetres wide 

on its door side, and at least 1,400 millimetres deep.


Section 8 Connection between different levels in a nonresidential building. 

If  the  level  difference  in  a  nonresidential  building  is  lower  than  the  storey  height  of  the 

building, connection between the levels shall in addition to stairs be provided either with a ramp 

specified in section 2, subsection 2 or a lift specified in section 7 subsection 3, or with other 

fixed device installed and intended for lifting persons which is suitable for a user of a wheelchair 

and walking frame with wheels.


If the level difference is equal to the storey height or higher, 

the connection between the levels shall be provided by means of a lift specified in section 7, 

subsection 3.


Section 9 Toilet and washing facility in a residential building. 

A residential building that under section 7 shall in addition to stairs have a lift shall have at 

least one toilet and washing facility in each dwelling which has a free space with a diameter of 

at least 1,300 millimetres.


The fixtures and fittings shall be placed with respect to the free space 

so that a person with mobility impairment can use them.


The toilet and washing facility shall be 

such that it can be equipped to be suitable for use by a person with mobility impairment.


A  dwelling  that  is  intended  for  sheltered  housing  or  supported  housing  of  a  person  with 

mobility or functional impairment shall have at least one toilet and washing facility which has 

a  free  space  with  a  diameter  of  at  least  1,500  millimetres.


The  fixtures  and  fittings  shall  be 

placed with respect to the free space so that a person with mobility impairment can use them.


In addition, on one side of the toilet seat there shall be a free space of at least 800 millimetres.


The toilet and washing facility shall be such that it can be equipped to be suitable for use by a 

person with mobility impairment.


In such a building at least five per cent of the dwellings, but 

at  least  one,  shall  have  a  toilet  and  washing  facility  specified  in  subsection  2.


In  addition, 

common spaces of such a building shall have a toilet facility specified in section 10 which is 

accessible from the passageway inside the building.


In a residential building the sauna, washing and changing facility common to all residents 

shall be suitable for persons with mobility and functional impairment.


The toilet and washing 

facility adjacent to the facility shall meet the requirements in subsection 2.


Section 10 Toilet facility in a nonresidential building. 

A  nonresidential  building  shall,  considering  the  intended  use  and  functional  units  of  the 

building and distances in the building, have an adequate number of appropriately located toilet 

facilities which are suitable for users of wheelchairs and walking frames with wheels.


The toilet 

facilities referred to above shall be located so that they are genderneutral with respect to the 

users and their assistants and they shall be marked with International Symbol of Access.


A toilet facility referred to in subsection 1 above shall have a free space with a diameter of at 

least 1,500 millimetres.


The fixtures and fittings shall be placed with respect to the free space 

so that a person with mobility impairment can use them.


In addition, on both sides of the toilet 

seat there shall be a free space of at least 800 millimetres.


Alternatively, two toilet facilities can 

be placed close to each other, one of them with a free space of at least 800 millimetres on the 

left side of the toilet seat and the other on the right side of the toilet seat.


The toilet seat shall be 

placed between 200 and 300 millimetres from the rear wall.


The  toilet  facility  shall  be  equipped  to  be  suitable  for  use  by  a  person  with  mobility 

impairment.


If the building has a control system, the toilet facility shall have a security alarm 

connection to the control.


Section 11 Other sanitary facility in a nonresidential building. 

A certain proportion of the changing rooms, washing facilities, saunas and swimming pools 

in  a  nonresidential  building  shall  be  suitable  for  a  person  with  mobility  and  functional 

impairment.


The facilities suitable for persons with mobility and functional impairment shall be 

marked  with  the  International  Symbol  of  Access.


If  the  building  has  a  control  system,  the 

facilities  suitable  for  persons  with  mobility  and  functional  impairment  shall  have  a  security 

alarm connection to the control.


In addition to the provisions in subsection 1, at least one changing room and washing facility 

located in a building housing an indoor swimming pool, a spa, a service centre or an education 

institution  or  in  a  similar  building  shall  be  suitable  for  use  by  persons  with  mobility  and 

functional impairment and their assistants, irrespective of their gender.


The access of a person with mobility impairment to a swimming pool in a building referred 

to in subsection 2 shall be arranged by means of a device intended for lifting persons which can 

be used without assistance.


Section 12 Assembly facilities. 

Any sound system in an auditorium, a restaurant, a conference facility, a facility for festive 

occasions, a teaching facility or other similar assembly facility or a public service facility shall 

have an induction loop or a similar sound transmission system.


If a facility referred to in subsection 1 has fixed seats, accessible entry routes shall lead to 

more than one row of seats and they shall have an adequate number of spaces for wheelchair 

users.


Section 13 Accommodation facilities. 

In a hotel building and other similar accommodation building, at least five per cent of the 

accommodation rooms, but at least one accommodation room, shall be suitable for persons with 

mobility and functional impairment and their assistants.


Such an accommodation room shall be 

equipped with a toilet and washing facility specified in section 9, subsection 2.


At least half of 

these toilet and washing facilities, but at least one, shall be equipped to be suitable for use by 

persons with mobility impairment and the other ones such that they can be equipped as such if 

necessary.


Section 14 Entry into force. 

This Decree enters into force on 1 January 2018.


This Decree repeals section 53 of the Land Use and Building Decree (895/1999).


