Ministry of the Environment Decree (4/16) concerning national choices for densities, 
self-weight and imposed loads for buildings, when applying standard SFS-EN 1991-1-1.
 
Section 1 Scope. 

This Decree is applied in the selection of densities, self-weight and imposed loads for buildings and is used in conjunction 
with the latest version of standard SFS-EN 1991-1-1.


Load arrangements for columns and walls. 

Ministry of the Environment Decree (4/16) concerning national choices for densities, 
self-weight and imposed loads for buildings, when applying standard SFS-EN 1991-1-1. 
Section 2 Load arrangements for columns and walls. 

When determining the most unfavourable effect of imposed loads, in accordance with clause 6.2.2(1) of the standard, the 
imposed load is assumed to be movable at least on the storey just above the column or the wall to be designed.


Reduction factor.  

Ministry of the Environment Decree (4/16) concerning national choices for densities, 
self-weight and imposed loads for buildings, when applying standard SFS-EN 1991-1-1. 
Section 4 Reduction factor. 

For loaded areas in categories A to D, clause 6.3.1.2(10) of the standard, the value for the reduction factor αA, 
calculated according to equation 6.1, shall be at least 0.8.


For continuing horizontal structures the loaded 
area shall be calculated span by span.


Joints between vertical and horizontal structures shall always be designed 
without a reduction factor.


A reduction factor αA shall not be applied in accidental design situations, including fire situations.


The use of a reduction factor αA shall be indicated in the design documentation and the party engaging in the building 
project shall be notified of this.


The reduction factor αn shall not be applied together with a combination factor ψ or reduction factor αA.


Values of actions on areas for storage and industrial activities. 

Ministry of the Environment Decree (4/16) concerning national choices for densities, 
self-weight and imposed loads for buildings, when applying standard SFS-EN 1991-1-1. 
Section 6 Values of actions on areas for storage and industrial activities. 

For loaded storage, production and access areas under category E1, in clause 6.3.2.2(1)P of the standard, the value for 
imposed loads on intermediate floors 7.5 kN/m2 and 3.0 kN/m2 for stairs shall be used.


The allowable maximum load shall be shown by a permanent sign that is appropriately located and clearly visible.


The 
load shall be stated on this sign in kg/m2.


Values of actions on garages and vehicle traffic areas. 
Traffic areas designed to categories F and G shall be posted with the appropriate warning signs, in accordance with 
clause 6.3.3.1(1)P of the standard.


When a warning sign is not posted, the areas shall be designed to an axle load Qk and also to an axle group load equal 
to 190 kN.


Adjacent parking and roof structures shall be designed, when necessary, also to loads from fire engines and rescue 
vehicles, and for a concentrated load of both hydraulic platform and extension ladder vehicles where such access is 
required.


Instruction. 

If the structure is designed for vehicle weights higher than category G, the load to be used on the 
basis of decree of the use of Vehicles on the Road (1257/1992) with amendment 407/2013 is a uniform load corresponding vehicle mass pursuant to decree and as point loads 

bogie/axle loads corresponding to the vehicle’s mass.


Horizontal loads on parapets and partition walls, line load qk and concentrated load Qk.

Parapets in categories A to E and panel parts of walls acting as parapets, as well as their fasteners, shall be designed to 
the concentrated load Qk = 0.3 kN acting on a random spot.


Annex B shall be applied to parapets and barriers in close proximity to car park lanes and ramps subject to impact by a 
vehicle driving at the speed allowed in the car park.


For other parapets and barriers subject to impact from a vehicle that 
is stopping, an equivalent static load may be used that is assumed to be at least 5 kN in category F and at least 25 kN in 
category G. 

Instruction. 

In order to prevent falling accidents, the horizontal load value for category E is the minimum 
requirement in terms of personnel safety.


Annex B: Vehicle barriers and parapets for car parks. 

Ministry of the Environment Decree (4/16) concerning national choices for densities, 
self-weight and imposed loads for buildings, when applying standard SFS-EN 1991-1-1. 
Section 10 Annex B: Vehicle barriers and parapets for car parks. 

Annex B shall be used when designing structures for impact barriers.


Ministry of the Environment Decree (5/16) concerning national choices for actions on structures exposed to fire, when 
applying standard SFS-EN 1991-1-2. 
Section 1 Scope. 

This Decree is applied in the selection of actions on structures exposed to fire and is used in conjunction with the latest 
version of standard SFS-EN 1991-1-2.


Temperature analysis. 

Ministry of the Environment Decree (5/16) concerning national choices for actions on structures exposed to fire, when 
applying standard SFS-EN 1991-1-2. 
Section 2 Temperature analysis. 

Instead of the method in Annex F, the National Building Code of Finland concerning fire safety in buildings shall be applied 

to the equivalent time of fire exposure.


Thermal loads to be used in temperature analysis. 

Ministry of the Environment Decree (5/16) concerning national choices for actions on structures exposed to fire, when 
applying standard SFS-EN 1991-1-2. 
Section 3 Thermal loads to be used in temperature analysis. 

When a building is designed and constructed in compliance with the fire classes and numerical values given in the 
regulations and guidelines of the National Building Code of Finland concerning fire safety in buildings, a temperature-time 
curve of a standard fire in accordance with clause 3.2.1(1) of the standard shall be used.


Combination rules for actions. 

Ministry of the Environment Decree (5/16) concerning national choices for actions on structures exposed to fire, when 
applying standard SFS-EN 1991-1-2. 
Section 4 Combination rules for actions. 

The representative value of the variable action shall be taken as the quasi-permanent value ψ2.1 Q1  during fire exposure, 
in accordance with clause 4.3.1(2) of the standard.


The frequent value ψ1.1 Q1 shall be used however for snow, ice and 

wind loads, in compliance with the national choices set out in standard SFS-EN 1990. 

Ministry of the Environment Decree (6/16) 
concerning national choices for snow loads, when applying standard SFS-EN 1991-1-3. 
Section 1 Scope. 

This Decree is applied in the selection of snow loads and is used in conjunction with the latest version of standard SFS-EN 
1991-1-3.


Snow load on roofs. 

Ministry of the Environment Decree (6/16) 
concerning national choices for snow loads, when applying standard SFS-EN 1991-1-3. 
Section 3 Snow load on roofs. 

For different topography, the value of exposure coefficients given in table 5.1 clause 5.2(7) of the standard shall be 
used.


For large roofs, where the smaller horizontal dimension of the roof is 50 m or more, and the topography is 
windswept, the value of the exposure coefficient shall be at least 1.


For different topographies, where the smaller horizontal dimension of the roof is at least 50 m, the exposure 
coefficient shall be increased based on the smaller horizontal dimension and side ratio, according to the factors in 
Table 1.


Factors to be used for increasing the exposure coefficient for snow load on roofs, where the smaller horizontal 
dimension is at least 50 m. 

In determining the snow load, in accordance with clause 5.2(8) of the standard, when the thermal insulating properties 
of the roof structure are insignificant, the thermal coefficient Ct may be reduced on the basis of a more exact study.


The value to be used for snow load s, however, is at least 0.5 kN/m2.


When  dimensioning  continuous  structures,  the  uneven  removal  of  snow 
from a roof is taken into account by means of a load arrangement where the snow load varies 
between 50% and 100% in different fields.


Multi-span roofs.  

Ministry of the Environment Decree (6/16) 
concerning national choices for snow loads, when applying standard SFS-EN 1991-1-3. 
Section 4 Multi-span roofs. 

When the slope of the roof is greater than 60° as given in clause 5.3.4(4) of the standard, the value μ3 = 1.6 shall be used.  

Ministry of the Environment Decree (7/16) 
concerning national choices for wind actions, when applying standard SFS-EN 1991-1-4. 
Section 1 Scope. 

This Decree is applied in the selection of wind actions on structures and is used in conjunction with the latest version of 
standard SFS-EN 1991-1-4.


When designing slender special structures, the value of the air density shall be calculated at the altitude and temperature 
relevant to the site and load conditions concerned.


Pressure and force coefficients for vertical walls of rectangular plan buildings. 

Ministry of the Environment Decree (7/16) 
concerning national choices for wind actions, when applying standard SFS-EN 1991-1-4. 
Section 5 Pressure and force coefficients for vertical walls of rectangular plan buildings. 

The reference heights, ze, for leeward walls and sidewalls, clause 7.2.2(1) of the standard, shall be calculated as for 

windward walls.


For the values of external pressure coefficients, clause 7.2.2(2) of the standard, when h/d is greater than 5, the values of 

coefficients cpe,10 and cpe,1 in row h/d = 5 in Table 7.1 of the standard shall be used.


Annex A: Terrain effects. 

Ministry of the Environment Decree (7/16) 
concerning national choices for wind actions, when applying standard SFS-EN 1991-1-4. 
Section 6 Annex A: Terrain effects. 

For the transition between terrain categories, Procedure 1 under clause A.2(1) in Annex A to the standard shall be 

followed.


Therefore, of the approaches given in Annex E, clause 
E.1.5.1(1) of the standard, the approach given in clause E.1.5.3 shall be used.


Scope Ministry of the Environment Decree (8/16) 
concerning national choices for thermal actions, when applying standard SFS-EN 1991-1-5. 
Section 1 Scope. 

This Decree is applied when selecting thermal actions and is used together with the latest version of standard SFS-EN 
1991-1-5.


Indicative temperatures for buildings above ground level. 

Ministry of the Environment Decree (8/16) 
concerning national choices for thermal actions, when applying standard SFS-EN 1991-1-5. 
Section 3 Indicative temperatures for buildings above ground level.  

The values in Table 5.2 of clause 5.3(2) of the standard for indicative temperatures for buildings above ground level 
shall apply as follows.


Indicative temperatures for underground parts of buildings.  

Ministry of the Environment Decree (8/16) 
concerning national choices for thermal actions, when applying standard SFS-EN 1991-1-5. 
Section 4 Indicative temperatures for underground parts of buildings.  

For indicative temperatures for underground parts of buildings, the values in Table 5.3 of clause 5.3(2) of the standard 
shall be applied, where T6 = 6 °C, T7 = 4 °C, T8 = -7 °C and T9 = -4 °C.


The  minimum  shade  air  temperatures  represent  values  with  an  annual  probability  of  falling  below  of  0.02,  and  the 
maximum shade air temperatures represent values with an annual probability of being exceeded of 0.02. 

The values of shade air temperature may be adjusted for height above sea level by subtracting 0.5°C per 100 m of height 
for minimum shade air temperatures and 1.0°C per 100 m of height for maximum shade air temperatures.


Scope (Ministry of the Environment Decree xx/2016, Section 1). 

This Decree is applied in the selection of actions during execution and is used in conjunction with the latest version of 
standard SFS-EN 1991-1-6.


Construction loads. 

Ministry of the Environment Decree (9/16) 
concerning national choices for actions during execution, when applying standard SFS-EN 1991-1-6. 
Section 2 Construction loads. 

The limits of the area where construction loads may be moved shall be marked in the plans, in accordance with clause 

2.2(4) of the standard, when the magnitude of the actions is significant in terms of the structure.


Design situations to be verified. 

Ministry of the Environment Decree (9/16) 
concerning national choices for actions during execution, when applying standard SFS-EN 1991-1-6. 
Section 3 Design situations to be verified. 

The design situation for wind actions during exceptional weather conditions shall be interpreted as an accidental design 
situation, in accordance with clause 3.1(1)P of the standard.


There are no recommended values for return periods in clause 3.1(5) of the standard for the determination of 
characteristic values of variable actions during execution regarding the nominal duration of a design situation lasting no 
more than three days.


In such a case, the magnitude of the action shall be 
chosen according to the meteorological predictions.


For the combination of snow loads and wind actions, in accordance with clause 3.1(7) of the standard, no reductions are 
allowed if the snow loads and wind actions that are used are less than in persistent design situations.


However, when the 
snow load can occur, the minimum value of the load s should be at least 0.5 kN/m2.


Imperfections and restraint actions.  

Ministry of the Environment Decree (9/16) 
concerning national choices for actions during execution, when applying standard SFS-EN 1991-1-6. 
Section 4 Imperfections and restraint actions.  

For a persistent design situation during execution, in accordance with clause 3.1(8) of the standard, the imperfections in 
the geometry of the structure and of structural members shall be those imperfections due to normal use of the 
completed structure.


The imperfections to be defined, however, shall be determined on a project-by-project basis when the execution includes 
stages where a structure or a structural member has an imposed load in a different position or location than when the 
structure or the structural member is in the final state.


The imperfections caused by restraint actions and their deflections during erection work shall be taken into consideration.


The imperfections caused by deflections in auxiliary construction works shall be taken into account if they differ from the 
imperfections of the persistent design situation.


Serviceability limit states. 

Ministry of the Environment Decree (9/16) 
concerning national choices for actions during execution, when applying standard SFS-EN 1991-1-6. 
Section 5 Serviceability limit states. 

Any deformation during execution shall not cause damage to adjacent structures nor to the surface materials of the 
structural members, in accordance with clause 3.3(2) of the standard.


The deformation during execution can, however, 
be greater than the allowed deformation for the completed structure if the deformation is reversible when the actions 
due to execution are removed.


The design situation during execution, compared to the persistent design situation, shall not cause larger crack widths 
in the structure and the cracking shall not reduce the stiffness of the structure, if this has not been taken into 
consideration in the persistent design situation.


Auxiliary construction works shall be designed so that the tolerances of the completed structure are not exceeded, in 
accordance with clause 3.3(6) of the standard.


Actions due to atmospheric icing. 

Ministry of the Environment Decree (9/16) 
concerning national choices for actions during execution, when applying standard SFS-EN 1991-1-6. 
Section 6 Actions due to atmospheric icing.  

Actions due to atmospheric icing shall be determined on a project-by-project basis, in accordance with clause 4.10(1)P  

of the standard.


Structures shall be designed to take into account a human impact load as an accidental action, when stumbling could lead 
to a person falling or when the structure under consideration has to prevent the fall of a person.


The durability of the fitting or rooftop safety product and its fastening and substructure are 

verified by means of either testing or computational analysis.


Testing is performed by means 
of a drop test pursuant to clause 8.2 of standard SFS-EN 516.


The durability of the fastening point and substructure may be verified by means of either 

testing or computational analysis.


Testing is performed by means of a drop test pursuant to 
clause 8.2 of standard SFS-EN 516.


When casting concrete, it shall be assumed that a variable horizontal point load acts in a random direction on the surface 

level of cast concrete, with a characteristic value of 1.5 kN.


Scope Ministry of the Environment Decree (10/16) 
concerning national choices for accidental actions, when applying standard SFS-EN 1991-1-7. 
Section 1 Scope. 

This Decree is applied in the selection of accidental actions and is used in conjunction with the latest version of standard 
SFS-EN 1991-1-7.


Accidental design situations. 

Ministry of the Environment Decree (10/16) 
concerning national choices for accidental actions, when applying standard SFS-EN 1991-1-7. 
Section 3 Accidental design situations. 

The designer of a structure shall devise a strategy such that neither the whole building nor a significant part of it will 
collapse if localised failure is sustained.


The  adoption  of  this  strategy  shall  provide  a  building  with  sufficient  robustness  to  not  succumb  to  various  types  of 
unspecified accidental actions.


The minimum period that a  structure needs to remain  intact following an accident  should be that period needed to 
facilitate the safe evacuation and rescue of personnel from the building and its surroundings.


Accidental design situations – strategies for limiting the extent of 

localised failure.  

Ministry of the Environment Decree (10/16) 
concerning national choices for accidental actions, when applying standard SFS-EN 1991-1-7. 
Section 4 Accidental design situations — strategies for limiting the extent of localised failure.  

The acceptable limit of ‘localised failure’, in accordance with clause 3.3(2), Note 2 of the standard, depends on the type 
of building: 
1) In multi-storey buildings, the localised failure may not exceed 15% of the floor area or 100 m2/storey.


If load-bearing walls form the vertical frame of a hall-type building, the localised failure may not exceed the length of the 
horizontal structures supported by the wall, multiplied by 2H, where H is the height of the load-bearing wall.


In this case, the building shall be designed pursuant to section 6, using 
either tying systems or alternative load transfer routes.


Accidental design situations – use of consequences classes. 

Ministry of the Environment Decree (10/16) 
concerning national choices for accidental actions, when applying standard SFS-EN 1991-1-7. 
Section 5 Accidental design situations — use of consequences classes.  

In the testing of accidental design situations to verify that a building or structure can remain intact, the Ministry of the 
Environment Decree concerning national choices for consequences classes, in accordance with standard SFS-EN 1990, 
shall  apply.

In an accidental limit state, the consequences class selected for the building pursuant to the national annex to standard SFS-EN 1990 is divided into subclasses for the selection of the principle of operation laid down in item 3.4(1) of the standard as follows:
1) Consequences class CC1 includes 1- and 2-storey buildings which are only occasionally occupied by people, such as warehouses;
2) Consequences class CC2 subclass a, lower group, includes buildings with a maximum of four aboveground floors or whose height from the ground is a maximum of 16 m. However, residential buildings with a maximum of two aboveground floors may be designed pursuant to consequences class 1 in an accidental limit state;
3) Consequences class CC2 subclass b, upper group, includes all other buildings and structures that are not in consequences classes 1, 2a or 3;
4) Consequences class CC3 subclass a includes residential buildings, office buildings, commercial buildings with 9–15 storeys and other buildings with 9–15 storeys with a similar intended use and load bearing system. The number of storeys includes any basement storeys;
5) Consequences class CC3 subclass b includes:
a) other buildings with more than 8 storeys, including a possible basement;
b) concert halls, theatres, sports and exhibitions halls and spectator galleries;
c) heavily loaded buildings or buildings with large spans that are often occupied by a large number of people;
d) special structures according to a case-by-case assessment.

Principles for ensuring the robustness of a building.  

Ministry of the Environment Decree (10/16) 
concerning national choices for accidental actions, when applying standard SFS-EN 1991-1-7. 
Section 6 Principles for ensuring the robustness of a building. 

Sufficient  robustness  for  a  multi-storey  building  shall  be  ensured,  in  accordance  with  clause  3.3(2),  Note  3  of  the 
standard, by applying three-dimensional tying for additional integrity or designing alternative load transfer path.


The tying system shall be designed to increase the robustness and integrity of a building in the event of higher damage 
consequences.


Alternative load paths shall be designed so that a localised failure does not exceed the limits given in section 4.


In the designing of key elements, in accordance with clause 3.3(2), Note 1 of the standard, accidental action Ad shall be 
determined by carrying out a risk assessment and the grounds for the values used shall be included and recorded in the 
design documentation.


For buildings in consequences class CC3b, a systematic risk assessment of the building shall be undertaken, taking into 
account both foreseeable and unforeseeable hazards.


If accidental actions can be determined by the risk assessment, 
they shall be taken into consideration in the design.


Buildings in consequences class CC2a: In addition  to  the operating  principles concerning consequences class CC1, horizontal ties 
shall be used in class CC2a buildings pursuant to clause 1.1 or horizontal structures shall be 

anchored to walls pursuant to clause 1.2.


Buildings in consequences class CC2b: 
In  addition  to  the  operating  principles  concerning  consequences  class  CC1,  horizontal 

structures shall use horizontal ties pursuant to clause 1.1, vertical ties shall be used in all load 
bearing columns and walls pursuant to clause 2, and vertical structures shall be bound to 

horizontal structures pursuant to clause 1.2.


Buildings in consequences class CC3a: 
In  addition  to  the  operating  principles  concerning  consequences  class  CC1,  horizontal 

structures shall use horizontal ties pursuant to clause 1.1, vertical ties shall be used in all load 
bearing columns and walls pursuant to clause 2, and vertical structures shall be bound to 

horizontal structures pursuant to clause 1.2.


Buildings in consequences class CC3b: 
In addition to the operating principles concerning consequences class CC1, a systematic risk 

assessment of the building should be undertaken in order to account for both foreseeable 
and unforeseeable hazards.


Regardless of the results of the risk assessment, the building shall 

meet the requirements of consequences class CC3a.


Those parts of the building where the notional removal of a column or a load-bearing wall 
section pursuant to the definition in clause 3 would cause a horizontal structure that contains 

horizontal ties to act as an overhang that is the height of the horizontal structure shall also 
be  inspected.


If  such  a  notional  removal  of  a  structural  member  results  in  damage  that 

exceeds the acceptable limit, the structure marked for notional removal shall be considered 
a key structural member in the risk assessment.


Horizontal ties. 

1.1 Peripheral and internal ties 

Horizontal peripheral and internal ties shall be provided around the perimeter of each floor 

and roof level and internally in two right angle directions.


The ties shall be continuous and 
be arranged as closely as practicable to the edges of floors and lines of columns and walls.


At least 30% of the ties shall be located in the immediate vicinity of the grid lines of the 
columns and the walls.


The ties shall have such deformation capacity that they can act as a replacement load 

transfer structure or as part of a replacement load transfer structure.


Each continuous tie, including its end connections, should be capable of sustaining a design 
tensile force for the accidental limit state, equal to the following values. 

Consequences classes CC2a and CC2b: The tie forces T are based on the characteristic value of the permanent actions gk for the 
horizontal structure.


If the internal ties must 
be centred on the supporting line, the minimum value of the tie force, 70 kN, will also be 

applied to internal ties (e.g.


If the internal ties must 
be centred on the supporting line, the minimum value of the tie force, 10 kN, will also be 
applied to internal ties.


In consequences classes CC3a and CC3b, the characteristic value for 
the permanent actions gk is usually greater than 3.0 kN/m2.


Peripheral and internal ties: 
When the characteristic value of the permanent actions for the horizontal structure is gk ≥ 

3.0 kN/m2. 

is 48 kN/m or (16 + 2.1 ns) kN/m, whichever is smaller. 
is the characteristic value of the permanent actions for the horizontal structure.


Horizontal ties to columns and walls. 

Edge columns and walls shall be tied to every floor and roof.


The ties should 
be capable of sustaining the following forces in accidental limit state: 

Consequences classes CC2a and CC2b:
  when the characteristic value of the permanent actions for the horizontal 

structure is gk ≤ 2.0 kN/m2.

where: 
s is the calculation width of the tie force, which is measured from centre to centre of the 
clear distance of vertical structures or to the edge of the building when the vertical 
structures are located in the outer corner.
is 48 kN/m or (16 + 2.1 ns) kN/m, whichever is smaller. 
is the storey height. 
is the calculation width of the tie force, which is measured from centre to centre of the 
clear distance of vertical structures or to the edge of the building when the vertical. 

structures are located in the outer corner.


Vertical ties. 

Each column and wall shall be supplied with continuous vertical ties from the foundations 

to the roof level.


The columns and walls carrying vertical actions shall be capable of resisting an accidental 
design tensile force equal to the largest design vertical permanent and variable load 

reaction applied to the column from any one storey.


Instruction. 

Definition of key components of building structure. 

The vertical structures of the building shall mainly be designed as non-key components of 

building structure.


Principles for ensuring the robustness of a hall-type building 

Ministry of the Environment Decree (10/16) 
concerning national choices for accidental actions, when applying standard SFS-EN 1991-1-7. 
Section 7 Principles for ensuring the robustness of a hall-type building. 

Sufficient robustness of a hall-type building, in accordance with clause 3.3(2), Note 3 of the standard, shall be ensured so that a 
localised failure does not exceed the limits given in section 4.


Localised failure is limited by means of structural measures.


For buildings in consequences class CC3b, a systematic risk assessment of the building should be undertaken, thereby taking into 
account both foreseeable and unforeseeable hazards.


If accidental actions can be specified by risk assessment, they shall be taken 
into consideration.

Instruction. 

Localised damage can be limited by means of one of the following actions: 
−  designing alternative load transfer routes 
−  increasing the static indeterminacy of the structure and ensuring the toughness  

of the structural joints  

−  by using a sufficient number of bracing structures on the roofs and walls 
−  by ensuring that the stability of the main supports is retained even after localised 

damage 

−  by designing secondary structures in a manner that prevents them from expanding the 

collapsed area.


Impact on supporting substructures. 

Ministry of the Environment Decree (10/16) 
concerning national choices for accidental actions, when applying standard SFS-EN 1991-1-7. 
Section 8 Impact on supporting substructures. 

 The values given in Table 1 for actions due to impact shall be complied with, in accordance with clause 4.3.1(1) of the 
standard.


The design forces for building structures given in Table 1 for the category of traffic may be multiplied by a reduction 
factor taken from Figure 1 as a function of distance d and the maximum permitted speed of the vehicle ν0, provided that 
the maximum speed limit is less than 80 km/h.


The  design  forces  shall  meet,  at  the  least,  the  requirements  for  the  category  of  traffic 
courtyards and parking garages in Table 1.


The reduction factors given in Figure 1 can be applied when the downward slope 
between the centreline of the nearest trafficked lane and the point of impact, measured perpendicularly to the lane, is 
no more than 1:5.


The effect of slopes steeper than this and the effect of upward slopes, as well as the effect of rails and 
other measures to avoid impact, shall be specified for the individual project, in accordance with clause 4.3.1(1), Note 2 
of the standard.


b If the horizontal distance from the structure to the edge of the courtyard area planned for vehicular traffic 
is at least 2.0 m, it is not necessary to design the structure for vehicular impact.


c The term ‘lorries’ refers to vehicles with a maximum gross weight of more than 3.5 tonnes.


When 
distance d is greater than 5 m, no requirements are specified for Class B structures, in accordance with clause 4.5.1.5(1) 
of the standard.


Scope  

Ministry of the Environment Decree (11/16) 
concerning national choices for actions induced by cranes and machinery, when applying standard SFS-EN 1991-3. 
Section 1 Scope 

This Decree is applied in the selection of actions induced by cranes and machinery and is used in conjunction with the 
latest version of standard SFS-EN 1991-3.


Actions induced by hoists and cranes on runway beams. 

Ministry of the Environment Decree (11/16) 
concerning national choices for actions induced by cranes and machinery, when applying standard SFS-EN 1991-3. 
Section 2 Actions induced by hoists and cranes on runway beams. 

Where the crane supplier is known at the time of design of crane runway beams, in accordance with clause 2.1(2) of 
the  standard,  the  wheel  loads  specified  by  the  crane  manufacturer  shall  be  primarily  used  for  actions  induced  on 
runways.


The actions should be given as static values without partial safety factors.


The actions shall be classified as 
permanent actions and variable and accidental actions.


The dynamic factors for different actions shall be reported.


For 
designing the building frame, the simultaneous actions on different crane runways shall be reported.


For the purpose 
of fatigue analysis, the rate of planned load accumulation of all cranes running on crane runways shall be reported.


The inaccuracies of the 
crane wheels should be determined together with the crane supplier.


Annex A: Basis of design — supplementary clauses to EN 1990 for 

runway beams loaded by cranes. 

Ministry of the Environment Decree (11/16) 
concerning national choices for actions induced by cranes and machinery, when applying standard SFS-EN 1991-3. 
Section 3 Annex A: Basis of design — supplementary clauses to EN 1990 for runway beams loaded by cranes. 

The partial safety factors given in Table 1 shall be applied to crane actions in accordance with clause A.2.2(1) of the 

standard.


The values given in the table shall also be applied when designing load-bearing structures carrying crane runway 

beams.


Design values of crane actions (STR/GEO). 

Persistent and transient design situations.

Crane action is the leading variable action. 

Crane action is an accompanying variable action. 

The values γGsup = 1.1 and γGinf = 0.9, set out in the Ministry of the Environment Decree concerning national choices for 
standard SFS-EN 1990, shall be applied to the partial safety factors in accordance with clause A.2.2(2) of the standard.


Instruction. 
 
As regards other actions, the Decree of the Ministry of the Environment concerning the 

national choices for standard SFS-EN 1990 shall be followed.


In the project specification, special attention shall be paid 
to the rescue routes and attack routes for the fire brigade, for which the crane runway may 

have to be locally dimensioned for fire actions.


Scope Ministry of the Environment Decree (12/16) 
concerning national choices for loads on silos and tanks, when applying standard SFS-EN 1991-4. 
Section 1 Scope. 

This Decree is applied in the selection of loads on silos and tanks and is used in conjunction with the latest version of 
standard SFS-EN 1991-4.


The combination factors 

shall be selected in accordance with Annex A and Annex B and shall comply with the Ministry of the Environment Decree 

concerning national choices for the basis of structural design, when applying standard SFS-EN 1990; 
for actions on silos, in accordance with clause A.2.1(1) of the standard, the value of the partial safety factor is γF=1.5.


With regard to other actions in the design of silos, the Ministry of the Environment Decree concerning national choices 

for the basis of structural design, when applying standard SFS-EN 1990, shall be complied with; and 

in design situations and action combinations for Action Assessment Classes 2 and 3 for actions on silos, in accordance 
with clause A.4 of the standard, the value of the combination factor ψ0 shall be 1.0, the value of the frequent combination 
factor ψ1 shall be 0.9, and the value of the quasi-permanent combination factor ψ2 shall be 0.8.


Annex B to the standard: Actions, partial factors and combinations of 

actions on tanks. 

Ministry of the Environment Decree (12/16) 
concerning national choices for loads on silos and tanks, when applying standard SFS-EN 1991-4. 
Section 3 Annex B to the standard: Actions, partial factors and combinations of actions on tanks. 

Annex B provides supplementary guidance applicable to actions on tanks concerning partial factors and on combinations 

of actions on tanks:  

1) the party engaging the building project shall specify the accidental actions to be considered, in accordance with clause 

B.2.14 of the standard; 

2) during operation, the value of the partial factor for the liquid induced loads and the actions on the tank due to weight 

γF is 1.35, in accordance with clause B.3(2) of the standard.


The values in Annex A, clause A.2.1(2), are not applied; or 
for the liquid induced loads and the actions on the tank due to weight, the value of the combination factor ψ0 shall be 
1.0, the value of the frequent combination factor ψ1 shall be 0.9, and the value of the quasi-permanent combination 
factor ψ2 shall be 0.8.


