 .
Decree of the Ministry of the Environment 

on the Moisture Performance of Buildings 

By decision of the Ministry of the Environment, the following is hereby laid down pursuant 

to Section 103 h, subsection 3 and Section 117 c, subsection 3 of the Land Use and Building 

Act (132/1999), as laid down in Section 103 h, subsection 3 of Act 682/2014 and Section 117 

c, subsection 3 of Act 958/2012: 

Chapter 1 

General 

Section 1 

Scope 

This Decree concerns the design and construction of the moisture performance of new build

ings.
The Decree also applies to building extensions, increases of calculated floor area, altera

tion and repair work as well as alteration of the intended use of the building.
Section 2 

Definitions 

For the purposes of this Decree: 

1) vapour barrier means a material layer which prevents damage by water vapour diffusion 

to the structure or in the structure;   

2)  air  barrier  means  a  material  layer  which  prevents  damaging  air  current  from  passing 

through the structure; 

3) capillary flow means the liquid transfer in porous materials due to local differences of po

rous negative pressure;  

4) moisture means chemically unbound water in a gaseous, liquid or solid state; 

5) wet room means a nonresidential room where the floor surface is exposed to water due to 

the rooms intended use and water can be spilled or condensed on the wall surfaces in normal 

use; 

6) building moisture means moisture exceeding the buildings inservice equilibrium moisture 

absorbed in the building or construction materials during or before the construction phase that 

needs to escape;  

7) crawl space means a purposefully constructed ventilated air space confined by the build

ings base floor, foundation wall and foundation;   

8) technical service life means the period when the structure or the building part will be tech

nically viable;  

9) ventilation opening or slot means an opening or slot from outside leading to the ventilation 

clearance or space allowing air flow to enter in the structure or to escape from it;  

10) ventilation space means a continuous air space in a structure for the flow of ventilation 

air.
Such a space shall have a perpendicular height or width against the air flow of at least 0.2 

metres;  

Directive 2015/1535/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (32015L1535); OJ L 241, 17.9.2015, p. 1 

 .
11) ventilation gap means a continuous air gap within a structure for the flow of ventilation 

air.
Such a gap shall have a perpendicular height or width against the air flow of no more than 

0.2 metres;  

12) waterproofing means a material layer which withstands continuous exposure to water and 

hazardous penetration of water into the structure;  

13) water pressure barrier means a material layer with seams and support structures which 

withstands the continuous water pressure loads imposed on the structure and prevents hazardous 

penetration of water into the structure due to water pressure;  

14) water vapour diffusion means water vapour molecule movement in a gas mixture under 

constant total pressure, with the aim of balancing the gas mixtures vapour content or partial 

pressure differences in said gas mixture;  

15) water vapour convection means the flow of water vapour together with the gas mixture 

contained therein, as a result of the total pressure difference.
16) water vapour resistance means the ratio between the water vapour concentration prevail

ing on the surface in various parts of a level layer of material or a layered structure composed 

of such level layered material or difference between partial pressures of water vapour and a 

layer of material or water vapour stream diffusing through a structure in a continuous state per 

area unit;  

17) roof means the structure composed of the roofing and a possible underlay and the struc

tural components immediately supporting them.
Section 3 

Essential technical requirements for a buildings moisture performance 

The principal designer, building designer and special designer shall, in accordance with their 

respective duties, design the building so that it meets the essential technical requirements for 

moisture performance in accordance with its intended use.
For alteration and repair work or 

alteration of the intended use, the designer shall determine the buildings initial construction 

method and moisture performance.
Considering the internal and external moisture stresses, the building, structures and building 

elements must be functional in terms of their moisture performance through their planned tech

nical service life.
The buildings excessive moisture content or moisture accumulation in the 

buildings parts or interior surfaces must not damage the building or cause health hazard to the 

occupants.
Section 4 

Moisture performance of buildings in alteration and repair work or in alteration of the in

tended use of the building 

It is not necessary to modify a buildings moisture performance in renovation and alteration 

work or in alteration of the intended use if the buildings moisture performance is functional.
Structures with functional moisture performance that have undergone alteration and repair work 

or  alteration of  the  intended  use  and  where  the technical  service  life  has  ended or that  have 

damaged moisture performance may be repaired by observing the building practices used during 

the construction period.
If the structure does not have defects in its design or construction which 

require modifications to its moisture performance, the alteration and repair work or the altera

tion of the intended use shall primarily be carried out in accordance with the functionality of the 

original structure.
Alteration and repair work or alteration of the intended use may be conducted 

in compliance with this Decree, if the intent is to improve the buildings moisture performance, 

If  the  structure  is  likely  to  cause  health  hazard  or  damages  the  moisture  performance  of the 

building, alteration and repair work or alteration of the intended use shall be conducted in com

pliance with this Decree.  

 . 

Chapter 2 

General principles of moisture performance 

Section 5 

Buildings moisture performance  

Water vapour, water, snow or ice from external or internal moisture sources must not cause 

damage by passing through the structures.
Rainwater or snow may not enter and moisture may 

not  accumulate  in the  enclosing  structure  through  windows,  doors  or  other  constructions  at

tached to the enclosure, building parts or equipment.
The buildings enclosure together with its 

construction layers and joints must form a whole, preventing the transfer of water across the 

surface of the enclosure into the construction by wind, slanting rain and wind pressure.
Building moisture and internal or external moisture transferred occasionally to the structures 

must be able to escape without causing damage.
Structures with surfaces exposed to moisture 

must be resistant to the effects of water.
Section 6 

Air and vapour tightness of structures  

The buildings enclosure together with its joints and air and vapour tightness of its internal 

structures must prevent the type of transfer of water vapour into the structures that damages 

their moisture performance.
Section 7 

Ventilation spaces and gaps of structures 

The ventilation openings or slots leading to the ventilation space or gap of a structure equipped 

with a ventilation space or gap must be positioned so that the ventilation space or gap is fully 

usable as a ventilation air flow path and that the ventilation space or  gap is free of enclosed, 

nonventilated areas.
Section 8 

Elevation of the building 

As regards the selection of the elevation of the building, the building designer and special 

designer shall, in accordance with their respective duties, consider the surface water and ground

water level and the flood risk.
In order to mitigate the risk of moisture damage, the structures exposed to moisture and the 

drainage systems of the foundation must be reliable throughout their planned service life.
Section 9 

Base fills and gravel backfills of buildings  

Humus soil, organic substances decomposing or rotting from moisture or building waste must 

not be left under new buildings, in their crawl spaces and in their gravel backfills functioning 

as a drainage layer.
During alteration or repair work of the buildings foundation, foundation wall or base floor, 

subsection 1 shall only be applicable to the repaired or modified parts. 

 .
Section 10 

Water leak detection, freezing and water condensing in ventilation, heating and cooling 

equipment and other systems  

In new buildings, the structural solutions must direct water leaks in ventilation, heating and 

cooling equipment or other systems or their attached devices to a visible location.
If there is a 

risk of water leakage from such systems or devices, these must be available for inspections, 

repairs  and  replacement.
Alteration  and  repair  work  or  alteration  of  the  intended  use  of  the 

building are subject to the provisions of Section 4.
Water must not freeze in the systems pipes, channels or devices.
Condensed water on the 

systems pipes, channels or devices must not cause harm or the condensed water must be re

movable without causing damage.
Section 11 

Essential technical requirements of building products 

The properties of building products used in the structures shall meet the requirements pre

sented in the respective design and the building products must be suitable for the conditions of 

the construction site.
When installed, the building product must be in a suitable condition for its 

intended use.
The building product must sustain any stresses caused by installation and operat

ing conditions throughout the service life of the structure or during the planned maintenance 

and repair interval.
Chapter 3 

Moisture control of a construction project 

Section 12 

Drafting and content of the moisture control statement of a construction project 

A party engaging in a construction project shall be responsible for preparing a moisture con

trol statement for the construction project.
The construction projects moisture control statement shall contain general construction pro

ject information, moisture control requirements at different stages of the project, procedures and 

measures for the verification of moisture control requirements and personnel in charge of mois

ture  control.
The  construction  projects  moisture  control  statement  shall  also  contain  infor

mation regarding the person responsible for moisture control of a construction project.
Section 13 

Drafting and content of the site moisture control plan  

The responsible site manager must manage the preparation of the sites moisture control plan 

based on the construction projects moisture control statement.
The contents of this moisture control plan are subject to Section 15 of the Ministry of the 

Environment Decree (216/2015) on the Preparation of Plans and Reports concerning Construc

tion.
Additionally, the sites moisture control plan must contain information on the persons re

sponsible for moisture control at the site for each construction phase.  

 .
Section 14 

Protection of building products and parts 

The person responsible for each construction phase shall be responsible for the protection of 

building products and unfinished building parts from becoming wet and from impurities during 

storage at the site and during construction.
Section 15 

Drying of structures 

The person responsible for the construction phase shall be responsible for that the moisture 

content in the structures and the drying ratio of building moisture makes it possible to cover the 

structure with a layer of drying retarder, coating or construction without damaging the structure.
The person responsible for the construction phase shall use moisture measurements to guarantee 

proper moisture content of structures before moving on to the next work phase.
Chapter 4 

Drainage of the building ground 

Section 16 

Removal of storm water 

The building designer and special designer shall, in accordance with their respective duties, 

design the drainage of the ground surface and storm water management in such a way that storm 

water is removed away from the proximity of the building with the help of a storm water system.
Section 17  

Drainage of the building ground 

The building designer and special designer shall, in accordance with their respective duties, 

design the drainage of the building ground for interrupting the capillary flow and keeping the 

level of ground water sufficiently far away from the buildings base floor and for removing the 

foundation drainage water away from the proximity of the foundation and from below the build

ing.
The building ground may be left without drainage if the special designer has determined on 

the basis of the report on the foundation and building ground conditions that the water permea

bility of the foundation soil and the groundwater level are not likely to cause harm to the build

ings moisture performance.  

 . 

Chapter 5 

Buildings base floor and wall structures facing the ground 

Section 18 

Base floor in contact with the ground 

The upper surface of the floor of the base floor structure must be located at the minimum 0.3 

metres above the ground surface outside the building except for the floors of the spaces that are 

either partially or wholly below the ground surface.
If the upper surface of the floor is, for some specific reason, less than 0.3 metres above the 

ground compared to the surrounding ground surface, the building designer and special designer 

shall, in accordance with their respective duties, pay particular attention to the moisture perfor

mance of the structure.
Section 19 

Base floor with the crawl space 

No water must accumulate in the crawl space under the base floor.
The crawl space must be 

ventilated.
Moisture in the crawl space must not damage the functionality or durability of struc

tures.
Section 20 

Crawl space height and access 

In a new building, the crawl space height must be 0.8 metres on average at the minimum.
The 

crawl space must be accessible for inspections and maintenance of the equipment and systems 

located there.
Section 21 

Wall structures against the ground 

The structure of the exterior wall against the ground must be waterproofed or isolated against 

water pressure or a structurally managed water removal system allowing the cellar wall to dry 

in  an  outward  direction  must  be  used  to  prevent  moisture  from  the  surrounding  ground  and 

storm water from penetrating the wall structure.
Waterproofing or water pressure barrier must 

be located on the outer surface of the exterior wall structure against the ground or inside the 

exterior thermal insulation facing the ground.
Section 22 

Moisture transferred from the foundation wall and base floor 

Moisture from the foundation wall and the base floors concrete slab must not transfer harm

fully to the wooden sole plates or upper wall and floor structures.
Section 23 

Structures exposed to water pressure 

Structures  exposed  to  water  pressure  must  withstand  continuous  water  pressure  effects 

throughout the planned service life of the structure.
Such structures must have water pressure 

barrier which prevents external water from penetrating harmfully into the structure. 

 . 

Attic floor and also wall and roof structures in contact with external air 

Chapter 6 

Section 24 

External wall structures 

External walls and their various layers must form a whole that prevents water from harmfully 

penetrating into the structures.
The water vapour resistance and air tightness of external walls 

and their various layers as well as the structures attached to the external wall and joints to the 

external wall must prevent the accumulation of moisture content of wall structures from internal 

water vapour diffusion or convection that is harmful from the viewpoint of moisture perfor

mance of structures.
If air barriers or vapour barriers have been used in the structure, the seams, 

edges and penetrations must be tight.
Section 25  

External cladding 

No water may enter behind the wall structures external cladding or the water and moisture 

from behind the external cladding must be drained without damaging the structure.
Unless mois

ture is removed by other methods, the space behind the external cladding must be ventilated.
Section 26 

Water drainage from the roof  

Water must be able to drain off the roof without causing damage to the building.
The roof 

structures and joints must be properly inclined and sealed for water drainage.
Section 27 

Structures of the attic floor 

The layers of attic floor structures and the ventilation must prevent the accumulation of dam

aging moisture into the roof structure resulting from water vapour diffusion or airflow.
If air 

barriers or vapour barriers have been used in the structure, the seams, edges and penetrations 

must be tight.
Chapter 7 

Wet rooms  

Section 28 

Wet room waterproofing and structures  

Water must not drift into or migrate as a capillary flow from the wet rooms to the surrounding 

structures  and  rooms.
Constructions  behind  surfaces  exposed  to  running  water,  repetitious 

splash water or water condensation must be waterproofed.
The flooring and wall covering must 

provide waterproofing, or separate waterproofing must be installed under the flooring and be

hind the wall covering.
No waterproofing is needed behind the coating on the wall in a separate 

toilet or sauna.
Due to the way wet rooms are used, the coating of the ceiling must withstand 

 .
splash water, temporarily high relative air humidity and temporary condensation of moisture on 

the ceilings surface.
Wet room waterproofing must form a whole which is impermeable on all waterproofed sur

faces as well as on their seams, penetrations and joints.
The flooring functioning as waterproof

ing or waterproofing located underneath the flooring in wet rooms must have a watertight con

nection with the waterproofing of the wall.
The structures of the wet rooms must be rigid enough that the thermal and moisture move

ments do no damage the wet room waterproofing or surface structures.
If, for a specific reason, 

no waterproofing is used in the wet room structures, the building designer or special designer 

shall, in accordance with their respective duties, prove in their design that the lack of water

proofing does not risk the fulfilment of essential technical requirements referred to in Section 

117 c of the Land Use and Building Act.
Section 29 

Wet room floor slopes and penetrations  

The slope of the wet room floor must allow water to flow into the floor drain.
The joint be

tween waterproofing and the floor drain must be tight.
Section 30 

Entry into force 

This Decree shall enter into force on 1 January 2018.
Upon the entry into force of this Decree, pending projects shall be subject to the rules valid at 

the time of entry into force of this Decree.
24 November 2017 

Kimmo Tiilikainen, Minister of the Environment, Energy and Housing
