Section 0: Introduction

Summary
0.1  This approved document, Approved Document L, Volume 1: Dwellings, gives guidance on how 
to comply with Part L of Schedule 1 to the Building Regulations and the energy efficiency 
requirements for dwellings. For guidance relating to non-domestic buildings, use Approved 
Document L, Volume 2: Buildings other than dwellings.

0.2  This approved document contains the following sections:

Approved document section

Section 0: Introduction

Section 1: Calculating the target primary energy rate,  
target emission rate and target fabric energy  
efficiency rate

Section 2: Calculating the dwelling primary energy  
rate, dwelling emission rate and dwelling fabric  
energy efficiency rate

Related Building Regulations requirements

n/a

Regulations 24, 25, 25B, 26, 26A, 26C, 27, 27A and 27C

Section 3: Consideration of high-efficiency  
alternative systems

Regulation 25A

Section 4: Limiting heat gains and losses

Requirement L1(a) of Schedule 1

Section 5: Minimum building services efficiencies  
and controls – general guidance

Section 6: System specific guidance

Requirements L1(b)(i), (ii) and L2 of Schedule 1

Section 7: Air permeability and pressure testing

Regulation 43

Section 8: Commissioning

Regulations 44 and 44ZA and requirements L1(b)(iii) and 
L2(b) of Schedule 1

Section 9: Providing information

Regulations 40 and 40A

Section 10: New elements in existing dwellings,  
including extensions

Section 11: Work to elements in existing dwellings

Regulation 23(2) and requirement L1(a) of Schedule 1

Regulations 6, 22 and 23(1) and requirement L1(a) of  
Schedule 1

Section 12: Consequential improvements

Regulation 28

Appendix A: Key terms

Appendix B: Reporting evidence of compliance

Appendix C: Work to thermal elements

Appendix D: Specification for a home built with a  
heat pump

Appendix E: Standards referred to

Appendix F: Documents referred to

n/a

n/a

n/a

n/a

n/a

n/a

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

1

ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONApplication
0.3  The guidance in Approved Document L, Volume 1 applies to dwellings only. 

In a mixed-use building, Approved Document L, Volume 2: Buildings other than dwellings should be 
consulted for building work in parts of the building that are not dwellings.

NOTE: Dwellings are self-contained units. Rooms for residential purposes and buildings that contain 
only rooms for residential purposes are not dwellings; Approved Document L, Volume 2: Buildings 
other than dwellings applies.

Common areas in buildings that contain multiple dwellings
0.4  For the common areas of buildings that contain more than one dwelling, the following guidance applies.

a. 

b. 

If the common areas are heated, the guidance in Approved Document L, Volume 2: Buildings 
other than dwellings should be followed.

If the common areas are unheated, individual fabric elements should meet the minimum 
standards set out in Section 4.

New dwellings
0.5  Guidance for new dwellings is given in Sections 1 to 9 of this approved document, Approved 

Document L, Volume 1.

0.6  For a conservatory or porch installed as part of the construction of a new dwelling, the treatment 
of the conservatory or porch depends on whether both of the following have been achieved. 
a.  There is adequate thermal separation between the dwelling and the conservatory or porch.

b.  The dwelling’s heating system is not extended into the conservatory or porch. 

If both (a) and (b) have been achieved, the conservatory or porch should be treated as if it were an 
extension being added onto an existing dwelling. The guidance for new elements in existing dwellings 
in Section 10 should be followed.

If either or both of (a) or (b) has not been achieved, the conservatory or porch should be treated as a 
room in the new dwelling. The guidance for the whole new dwelling should be followed, including 
for dwelling primary energy rate, dwelling emission rate and dwelling fabric energy efficiency rate 
calculations.

Extensions to and work on existing dwellings
0.7  Guidance for existing dwellings is given in this approved document for the following. 

a.  Limiting heat gains and losses: Section 4.

b.  Building services: Sections 5 and 6.

c.  New elements in existing dwellings, including replacing a fabric element and constructing an 

extension: Section 10.

d.  Existing elements in existing dwellings, including renovating or retaining a thermal element, 

material change of use and change to energy status: Section 11.

NOTE: For building work in very large dwellings of over 1000m2, consequential improvements may 
be required to improve the energy efficiency of the dwelling. Guidance is given in Section 12. 

2 

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONExemptions for listed buildings, buildings in conservation areas and scheduled 
monuments 
0.8  Work to the following types of dwellings does not need to comply fully with the energy efficiency 
requirements where to do so would unacceptably alter the dwelling’s character or appearance. 

a.  Those listed in accordance with section 1 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation 

Areas) Act 1990.

b.  Those in a conservation area designated in accordance with section 69 of the Planning (Listed 

Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990.

c.  Those included in the schedule of monuments maintained under section 1 of the Ancient 

Monuments and Archaeological Areas Act 1979.

0.9  Work to a dwelling in paragraph 0.8 must comply with the energy efficiency requirements where 

this would not unacceptably alter the dwelling’s character or appearance. The work should comply 
with standards in this approved document to the extent that it is reasonably practicable. 

Historic and traditional dwellings
0.10  The energy efficiency of historic and traditional dwellings should be improved only if doing so will 
not cause long-term deterioration of the building’s fabric or fittings. In particular, this applies to 
historic and traditional buildings with a vapour permeable construction that both absorbs moisture 
and readily allows moisture to evaporate. Examples include those built with wattle and daub, cob 
or stone and constructions using lime render or mortar.

0.11  New extensions to historic and traditional dwellings should comply fully with the energy efficiency 
standards in this approved document unless there is a need to match the external appearance or 
character of the extension to that of the host building. The work should comply with standards in 
this approved document to the extent that it is reasonably practicable.

0.12  In determining whether full energy efficiency improvements should be made, the building control 

body should consider the advice of the local authority’s conservation officer. 

0.13  Additional guidance is available in Historic England’s Energy Efficiency and Historic Buildings: 

Application of Part L of the Building Regulations to Historic and Traditionally Constructed Buildings. 

Exemptions for conservatories and porches
0.14  Where a dwelling is extended by adding a conservatory or porch, the work is exempt from  

the energy efficiency requirements, under regulation 21 of the Building Regulations, if all of the 
following apply.

a.  The extension is at ground level.

b.  The floor area of the extension does not exceed 30m2.

c.  The glazing complies with Part K of Schedule 1 to the Building Regulations.

d.  Any wall, door or window that separates the extension from the dwelling has been retained or, if 

removed, has been replaced with a wall, door or window.

NOTE: Replacement walls, windows and doors should meet the requirement in regulation 23(2). See 
Section 10. 

e.  The heating system of the dwelling is not extended into the conservatory or porch. 

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

3

ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONExemptions for covered areas
0.15  Where a dwelling is extended by adding a carport that is open on at least two sides, a covered 
yard, a covered walkway or a covered driveway, the work is exempt from the energy efficiency 
requirements if both of the following apply.

a.  The extension is at ground level.

b.  The floor area of the extension does not exceed 30m2.

Live/work units
0.16  A building that contains both living accommodation and space for commercial purposes (e.g. for 
a workshop or office) should be treated as a dwelling if the commercial part can be reverted to 
domestic use.

0.17  The commercial part of a building can be reverted to domestic use if all of the following apply.

a.  There is direct access between the commercial space and the living accommodation.

b.  The commercial space and the living accommodation are within the same thermal envelope.

c.  The living accommodation comprises a substantial proportion of the total area of the unit. What 
constitutes a ‘substantial proportion’ should be assessed on a case-by-case basis by the building 
control body.

NOTE: A large non-domestic building that contains a small flat for a manager is not treated as 
a dwelling. A dwelling that contains a room used as an office or utility space is still treated as a 
dwelling.

Mixed-use developments
0.18  When constructing a dwelling as part of a larger building that contains other types of 

accommodation, sometimes called a mixed-use development, refer to the two volumes of 
Approved Document L as follows. 

a.  For guidance on each individual dwelling, use this approved document, Approved Document L, 

Volume 1: Dwellings. 

b.  For guidance on the non-dwelling parts of the building, such as heated common areas and any 

commercial or retail space, use Approved Document L, Volume 2: Buildings other than dwellings.

Selected key interactions with other parts of the Building 
Regulations 
0.19  The approved documents set out what, in ordinary circumstances, may be accepted as one way 
to comply with the Building Regulations. Those designing or undertaking building work remain 
responsible for assessing, on a case-by-case basis, whether specific circumstances require additional 
or alternative measures to achieve compliance with the regulatory requirements. There are 
interactions between many of the requirements of the Building Regulations. Guidance on some key 
interactions is given below.

Interaction with Part C
0.20 This approved document, Approved Document L, Volume 1, provides guidance and examples on 
upgrading thermal elements. For interstitial and surface condensation, a lesser standard may be 
acceptable. Guidance in Approved Document C should be followed.

4 

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONInteraction with Part E 
0.21  This approved document, Approved Document L, Volume 1, provides guidance on insulation that 

is reasonably continuous and limits thermal bridging. Construction junctions should limit noise 
transfer where Part E of the Building Regulations sets a requirement. Approved Document E should 
be followed.

Interaction with Part F 
0.22 This approved document, Approved Document L, Volume 1, provides guidance on reducing 

unwanted heat loss, by achieving optimum airtightness. When specifying the minimum amount 
of purpose-provided ventilation, consider the air infiltration of a dwelling; follow Approved 
Document F.

Interaction with Part J
0.23 This approved document, Approved Document L, Volume 1, provides guidance on airtightness. For 
guidance on permanent ventilation openings for open flued appliances in very airtight dwellings, 
follow Approved Document J.

Interaction with Part K and Part M 
0.24 This approved document, Approved Document L, Volume 1, provides guidance on controls for fixed 
building services and on-site electricity generation. Manual controls, where provided, should be 
within reasonable reach of the occupants. Follow the guidance in Approved Documents K and M.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

5

ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONRegulations 24, 25, 25B, 26, 26A, 26C, 27, 27A 
and 27C: Energy performance of dwellings 
calculations 

This section deals with the requirements of regulations 24, 25, 25B, 26, 26A, 26C, 27, 27A and 27C of 
the Building Regulations 2010.

Regulations

Methodology of calculation of the energy performance

24. 

(1)  The Secretary of State shall approve—

(a)   a methodology of calculation of the energy performance of buildings, including methods for calculating 

asset ratings and operational ratings of buildings; and

(b)   ways in which the energy performance of buildings, as calculated in accordance with the methodology, 

shall be expressed.

(2)  In this regulation—

 “asset rating” means an energy performance indicator determined from the amount of energy estimated to 
meet the different needs associated with a standardised use of the building; and

 “operational rating” means an energy performance indicator determined from the amount of energy 
consumed during the occupation of a building over a period of time and the energy demand associated 
with a typical use of the building over that period.

Minimum energy performance requirements for new buildings 
25. 

 Minimum energy performance requirements shall be approved by the Secretary of State, calculated and 
expressed in accordance with the methodology approved pursuant to regulation 24, for—
(a)  new buildings (which shall include new dwellings), in the form of target CO2 emission rates; 
(b)  new dwellings, in the form of target fabric efficiency rates; and

(c)  new buildings in the form of target primary energy rates.

Nearly zero-energy requirements for new buildings
25B.  Where a building is erected, it must be a nearly zero-energy building.

CO2 emission rates for new buildings
26. 

 Where a building is erected, it shall not exceed the target CO2 emission rate for the building that has been 
approved pursuant to regulation 25, applying the methodology of calculation and expression of the energy 
performance of buildings approved pursuant to regulation 24. 

Fabric energy efficiency rates for new dwellings
26A.  Where a dwelling is erected, it shall not exceed the target fabric energy efficiency rate for the dwelling that 
has been approved pursuant to regulation 25, applying the methodology of calculation and expression of the 
energy performance of buildings approved pursuant to regulation 24.

Target primary energy rates for new buildings
26C.   Where a building is erected it must not exceed the target primary energy rate for the building which has been 
approved pursuant to regulation 25(c), applying the methodology of calculation and expression of the energy 
performance of buildings approved pursuant to regulation 24.

6 

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R24-27CONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regulation continued 
CO2 emission rate calculations
27. 

(1)  This regulation applies where a building is erected and regulation 26 applies.

(2)   Not later than the day before the work starts, the person carrying out the work shall give the local 

authority a notice which specifies—
(a)   the target CO2 emission rate for the building, calculated and expressed in accordance with the 

methodology approved pursuant to regulation 24,

(b)   the CO2 emission rate for the building as designed, calculated and expressed in accordance with the 

methodology approved pursuant to regulation 24, and

(c)  a list of specifications to which the building is to be constructed.

(3)   Not later than five days after the work has been completed, the person carrying out the work shall give the 

local authority—

(a)  a notice which specifies—

(i)   the target CO2 emission rate for the building, calculated and expressed in accordance with the 

methodology approved pursuant to regulation 24,

(ii)   the CO2 emission rate for the building as constructed, calculated and expressed in accordance with 

the methodology approved pursuant to regulation 24, and

(iii)  whether the building has been constructed in accordance with the list of specifications referred to in 

paragraph (2)(c), and if not a list of any changes to those specifications; or

(b)   a certificate of the sort referred to in paragraph (4) accompanied by the information referred to in sub-

paragraph (a).

(4)   A local authority are authorised to accept, as evidence that the requirements of regulation 26 have 

been satisfied, a certificate to that effect by an energy assessor who is accredited to produce energy 
performance certificates for that category of building.

(5)   In this regulation, “specifications” means specifications used for the calculation of the CO2 emission rate.

Fabric energy efficiency rate calculations
27A. (1)   This regulation applies where a dwelling is erected and regulation 26A applies. 

(2)   Not later than the day before the work starts, the person carrying out the work shall give the local 

authority a notice which specifies— 

(a)   the target fabric energy efficiency rate for the dwelling, calculated and expressed in accordance with 

the methodology approved pursuant to regulation 24; 

(b)   the fabric energy efficiency rate for the dwelling as designed, calculated and expressed in accordance 

with the methodology approved pursuant to regulation 24; and 

(c)  a list of specifications to which the dwelling is to be constructed. 

(3)   Not later than five days after the work has been completed, the person carrying out the work shall give the 

local authority— 

(a)  a notice which specifies— 

(i)   the target fabric energy efficiency rate for the dwelling, calculated and expressed in accordance with 

the methodology approved pursuant to regulation 24; 

(ii)   the fabric energy efficiency rate for the dwelling as constructed, calculated and expressed in 

accordance with the methodology approved pursuant to regulation 24; and 

(iii)  whether the dwelling has been constructed in accordance with the list of specifications referred to 

in paragraph (2)(c), and if not a list of any changes to those specifications; or 

(b)   a certificate of the sort referred to in paragraph (4) accompanied by the information referred to in sub-

paragraph (a). 

(4)   A local authority is authorised to accept, as evidence that the requirements of regulation 26A have 

been satisfied, a certificate to that effect by an energy assessor who is accredited to produce energy 
performance certificates for that category of building. 

(5)   In this regulation, “specifications” means specifications used for the calculation of the fabric energy 

efficiency rate.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

7

R24-27CONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regulation continued 

Target primary energy rate calculations for new buildings
27C.  (1)    This regulation applies where a building is erected.

(2)   Not later than the day before the work starts, the person carrying out the work must give the local 

authority a notice which specifies—

(a)   the target primary energy rate for the building calculated and expressed in accordance with the 

methodology approved pursuant to regulation 24;

(b)   the calculated target primary energy rate for the building as designed, calculated and expressed in 

accordance with the methodology approved pursuant to regulation 24; and

(c)   the list of specifications to which the building is to be constructed.

(3)   Not later than five days after the work has been completed, the person carrying out the work must give the 

local authority—

(a)  a notice which specifies—

(i)   the target primary energy rate for the building calculated and expressed in accordance with the 

methodology approved pursuant to regulation 24;

(ii)  t he calculated target primary energy rate for the building as constructed, calculated and expressed in 

accordance with the methodology approved pursuant to regulation 24; and

(iii)  whether the building has been constructed in accordance with the list of specifications referred to in 

paragraph (2)(c), and if not a list of any changes to those specifications; or

(b)   a certificate of the sort referred to in paragraph (4) accompanied by the information referred to in sub-

paragraph (a).

(4)   A local authority is authorised to accept, as evidence that the requirements of regulation 26C have 

been satisfied, a certificate to that effect by an energy assessor who is accredited to produce energy 
performance certificates for that category of building.

(5)   In this regulation, “specifications” means specifications used for the calculation of the target primary energy 

rate.

NOTE: Where the building control body is an approved inspector, see regulation 20 of the Building 
(Approved Inspectors etc.) Regulations 2010 (as amended).

Intention

The Secretary of State considers that a dwelling has a very high performance rate for the purposes of 
the definition of a nearly zero-energy building if both of the following are met.

a.  The dwelling meets the target emission rate required under regulation 26.

b.  Both:

i.  An analysis is made of the technical, environmental and economic feasibility of using high-

efficiency alternative systems, which include decentralised energy supply systems based on 
energy from renewable sources.

ii.  This analysis is considered as required by regulation 25A.

Regulation 24 

Regulation 24 requires the Secretary of State to approve a methodology of calculation of the 
energy performance of a building. For a new dwelling, the approved methodology is the Standard 
Assessment Procedure.

Calculation methodologies are set out in Section 1 and Section 2 of this approved document.

8 

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R24-27CONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regulation 25

Regulation 25 requires the Secretary of State to approve minimum energy performance requirements. 
These requirements are in the form of a target primary energy rate, a target emission rate and a 
target fabric energy efficiency rate.

The targets are set out in Section 1 of this approved document.

Regulations 26, 26A and 26C

A newly constructed dwelling must be shown to meet regulations 26, 26A and 26C by producing 
calculations to show that the dwelling meets all of the following.

a.  Target primary energy rate.

b.  Target emission rate.

c.  Target fabric energy efficiency rate.

Section 2 of this approved document sets out how to produce these calculations.

Regulations 27, 27A and 27C 

Both before and after a newly constructed dwelling is built, a notice must be given to the building 
control body of the calculations. 

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

9

R24-27CONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONSection 1: Calculating the target primary 
energy rate, target emission rate and target 
fabric energy efficiency rate

1.1  A new dwelling must be built to a minimum standard of total energy performance. This is evaluated 
by comparing calculations of the performance of the ‘actual dwelling’ against calculations of the 
performance of a theoretical dwelling called the ‘notional dwelling’. This must be carried out both 
at the design stage and when work is complete. 

The notional dwelling is the same size and shape as the actual dwelling and has standardised 
properties for fabric and services. The full properties of the notional dwelling are set out in the 
Government’s Standard Assessment Procedure (SAP) for energy rating of dwellings.

1.2  The energy performance of the notional dwelling is described using the following metrics.

a.  The target primary energy rate, in kWhPE/m2 per year: this is influenced by the fabric and fuel.
b.  The target emission rate, in kgCO2/m2 per year: this is influenced by the fabric and fuel.
c.  The target fabric energy efficiency rate, in kWh/m2 per year: this is influenced by the fabric only.

1.3  The target primary energy rate, target emission rate and target fabric energy efficiency rate for 

individual dwellings must be calculated using the Government’s Standard Assessment Procedure, 
Appendix R. The standardised properties are summarised in Table 1.1.

NOTE: For an up-to-date list of approved software, follow the link to SAP 10 at:  
https://www.gov.uk/guidance/standard-assessment-procedure. 

10  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R24-27CONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONBuildings that contain multiple dwellings
1.4  For a building that contains more than one dwelling – for example a block of flats or a terrace 
of houses – an average target primary energy rate, target emission rate and target fabric energy 
efficiency rate may be calculated as an alternative to individual target rates for each dwelling.  
The floor-area-weighted average of the target primary energy rate, target emission rate and target 
fabric energy efficiency rate for all the dwellings in the building should be calculated using the 
following formula:

[(target primary energy rate1 × floor area1) + (target primary energy rate2 × floor area2) +  
(target primary energy rate3 × floor area3) + …]
(floor area1 + floor area2 + floor area3 + …)

1.5  The average target emission rate should be calculated using the formula above but replacing target 

primary energy rate with target emission rate. 

The average target fabric energy efficiency rate should be calculated using the formula above but 
replacing target primary energy rate with target fabric energy efficiency rate. 

1.6  Calculating an average target primary energy rate, target emission rate or target fabric energy 

efficiency rate for separate buildings on the same site is not considered a reasonable method to 
show compliance.

District heat networks
1.7  For a dwelling that is connected to an existing district heat network, the notional building used to 
calculate the target primary energy rate and target emission rate can use the same primary energy 
and CO2 emission factors for the heat and hot water delivered to the dwelling as used in the 
calculation of the dwelling primary energy rate and dwelling emission rate. All other aspects of the 
notional building, except wastewater heat recovery, should remain as outlined in Table 1.1.

NOTE: For a dwelling that is connected to a new district heat network, the notional building used 
to calculate the target primary energy rate and target emission rate should follow the specification 
shown in Table 1.1. 

Notional dwelling specification
1.8  The full notional dwelling specification used in the Standard Assessment Procedure is given in 
Appendix R of SAP version 10: https://www.bregroup.com/sap/sap10/. The notional dwelling 
specification is summarised in Table 1.1.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

11

R24-27CONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONTable 1.1  Summary of notional dwelling specification for new dwelling(1)

Element or system

Reference value for target setting

Opening areas (windows, roof windows, 
rooflights and doors)

Same as for actual dwelling not exceeding a total area of openings of 25% 
of total floor area(2)

External walls including semi-exposed 
walls

U = 0.18 W/(m²·K)

Party walls

Floors

Roofs

U = 0

U = 0.13 W/(m²·K)

U = 0.11 W/(m²·K)

Opaque door (less than 30% glazed area)

U = 1.0 W/(m²·K)

Semi-glazed door (30–60% glazed area) U = 1.0 W/(m²·K)

Windows and glazed doors with 
greater than 60% glazed area

U = 1.2 W/(m²·K) 
Frame factor = 0.7

Roof windows

Rooflights

Ventilation system

Air permeability

U = 1.2 W/(m²·K), when in vertical position (for correction due to angle, see 
specification in SAP 10 Appendix R)

U = 1.7 W/(m2·K), when in horizontal position (for correction due to angle, 
see specification in SAP 10 Appendix R)

Natural ventilation with intermittent extract fans

5 m³/(h·m²) at 50 Pa

Main heating fuel (space and water)

Mains gas

Heating system

Boiler and radiators 
Central heating pump 2013 or later, in heated space 
Design flow temperature = 55 °C

Boiler

Efficiency, SEDBUK 2009 = 89.5% 

Heating system controls

Boiler interlock, ErP Class V

Either:

–  single storey dwelling in which the living area is greater than 70% of the 

total floor area: programmer and room thermostat

–  any other dwelling: time and temperature zone control, thermostatic 

radiator valves

Hot water system

Heated by boiler (regular or combi as above) 
Separate time control for space and water heating

Wastewater heat recovery (WWHR)

All showers connected to WWHR, including showers over baths 
Instantaneous WWHR with 36% recovery efficiency utilisation of 0.98

Hot water cylinder

Lighting

If cylinder, declared loss factor = 0.85 ´ (0.2 + 0.051 V2/3) kWh/day 
where V is the volume of the cylinder in litres

Fixed lighting capacity (lm) = 185 ´ total floor area
Efficacy of all fixed lighting = 80 lm/W

Air conditioning

None

Photovoltaic (PV) system

For houses: kWp = 40% of ground floor area, including unheated spaces / 6.5 
For flats: kWp = 40% of dwelling floor area / (6.5 ´	number of storeys in block) 
System facing south-east or south-west

NOTE:
1.  For a dwelling connected to an existing district heat network, an alternative notional building is used. See 

paragraph 1.8 and SAP 10.

2.  See SAP 10 for details.

12  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R24-27CONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONSection 2: Calculating the dwelling primary 
energy rate, dwelling emission rate and 
dwelling fabric energy efficiency rate

2.1  The same approved calculation tool must be used to calculate the target primary energy rate, 

target emission rate and target fabric energy efficiency rate and the dwelling primary energy rate, 
dwelling emission rate and dwelling fabric energy efficiency rate.

2.2  The dwelling primary energy rate, dwelling emission rate and dwelling energy efficiency rate must 

be calculated at both of the following points using the same calculation tool.

a.  Before work starts, using design values. 

b.  When work is complete, using figures for the building as constructed, and incorporating both of 

the following.

i.  Any changes that have been made during construction to the list of specifications.

ii.  The measured air permeability.

2.3  At both of these points the dwelling primary energy rate, dwelling emission rate and dwelling 

fabric energy efficiency rate must not exceed the target primary energy rate, target emission rate 
and target fabric energy efficiency rate, respectively. The specification of the actual dwelling may 
vary from that of the notional dwelling if the dwelling meets the target primary energy rate, target 
emission rate, target fabric energy efficiency rate and the guidance in this approved document.

Building control notification
2.4  The building control body must be notified, before the work starts, of all the following.

a.  The target primary energy rate and the dwelling primary energy rate (calculated using design 

values).

b.  The target emission rate and the dwelling emission rate (calculated using design values).

c.  The target fabric energy efficiency rate and the dwelling fabric energy efficiency rate (calculated 

using design values).

d.  A list of specifications used in the calculations.

Items (a) to (d) above may be reported using the design stage Building Regulations England Part L 
compliance report (BREL report). For further details of the design stage BREL report, see Appendix B.

2.5  The building control body must be notified, once the work is complete, of all of the following.

a.  The as-built target primary energy rate and as-built dwelling primary energy rate.

b.  The as-built target emission rate and as-built dwelling emission rate.

c.  The as-built target fabric energy efficiency rate and as-built dwelling fabric energy efficiency 

rate.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

13

R24-27CONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONd.  A list of specifications used in the as-built calculations, and whether the specifications have 

changed from those used in the design stage calculations.

Building control bodies are authorised to accept notification of (a) to (d) above as reported in the 
completion stage BREL report together with photographic evidence of compliance. For further details 
of the post-completion BREL report and photographic evidence, see Appendix B. 

Buildings that contain multiple dwellings
2.6  Buildings that contain more than one dwelling must comply with one of the following.

a.  Every individual dwelling complies with all of the following conditions.

i.  The dwelling primary energy rate must not exceed the individual dwelling’s target primary 

energy rate.

ii.  The dwelling emission rate must not exceed the individual dwelling’s target emission rate.

iii.  The dwelling fabric energy efficiency rate must not exceed the individual dwelling’s target 

fabric energy efficiency rate.

OR

b.  All of the following are met.

i.  The average dwelling primary energy rate for the whole building, calculated in accordance 

with paragraph 2.6, must not exceed the average target primary energy rate.

ii.  The average dwelling emission rate for the whole building, calculated in accordance with 

paragraph 2.6, must not exceed the average target emission rate. 

iii.  The average dwelling fabric energy efficiency rate for the whole building, calculated in 

accordance with paragraph 2.6, must not exceed the average target fabric energy efficiency 
rate.

2.7  The average dwelling primary energy rate, dwelling emission rate and dwelling fabric energy 

efficiency rate are the floor-area-weighted averages of the individual dwelling primary energy 
rate, dwelling emission rate and dwelling fabric energy efficiency rate for all the dwellings in the 
building. The average dwelling primary energy rate, dwelling emission rate and dwelling fabric 
energy efficiency rate should be calculated using the same averaging methodology. 

An average dwelling primary energy rate, dwelling emission rate or dwelling fabric energy efficiency 
rate should not be calculated across separate buildings on a site.

Guidance on how to calculate an average target primary energy rate is given in paragraph 1.5. 
Guidance on how to calculate an average target emission rate and average target fabric energy 
efficiency rate is given in paragraph 1.6.

NOTE: Information and photographic evidence should be provided for each individual dwelling, as 
described in Section 9 and Appendix B.

14  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R24-27CONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONSpecial considerations when calculating the dwelling 
primary energy rate and dwelling emission rate 

Secondary heating in the dwelling primary energy rate and dwelling emission 
rate calculation
2.8  When calculating the dwelling primary energy rate and dwelling emission rate for a dwelling with a 

secondary heating appliance, all of the following apply.

a.  The value used in the calculation for the fraction of heat provided by the secondary heating 

system must be as defined by the Standard Assessment Procedure for the particular combination 
of main heating system and secondary heating appliance. 

b.  The efficiency of the secondary heating appliance with its appropriate fuel should be used in the 

calculation of the dwelling primary energy rate and dwelling emission rate.

c. 

If a chimney or flue is provided but no appliance is installed, the following appliances should be 
assumed when calculating the dwelling primary energy rate and dwelling emission rate.

i. 

If a gas point is located next to the hearth, assume a decorative fuel-effect gas fire open to 
the chimney or flue with an efficiency of 20%.

ii. 

If there is no gas point, assume one of the following:

• 

• 

if the dwelling is not in a smoke control area, an open fire, in a grate, burning multi-fuel 
with an efficiency of 37%

if the dwelling is in a smoke control area, an open fire, in a grate, burning smokeless solid 
mineral fuel with an efficiency of 37%.

Community heating systems and district heat networks 
2.9 

If thermal energy is supplied from a district heat network, a CO2 emission factor and primary 
energy factor for the heat delivered to the dwelling by the district heat network should be 
calculated. These factors should be used in the calculations of the dwelling primary energy rate 
and dwelling emission rate.  

2.10  The same CO2 emission factors used to calculate the dwelling emission rate should be used 

to check against the minimum performance standards described in Section 6 of this approved 
document.

2.11  When calculating the dwelling primary energy rate and dwelling emission rate for a dwelling 

connected to a community heating system or district heat network, the following should all apply.

a.  The annual percentage of heat supplied from each heat source should be the same for each 

newly connected dwelling. 

b.  The calculation should account for the predicted effect of all dwellings that will be connected 

to the system in the first 12 months after the dwellings are connected.

c.  A submission to the building control body should be made to show that the community heating 

system or district heat network has the capacity to provide the percentage of heat that is 
assumed. 

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

15

R24-27CONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSION2.12  When calculating the dwelling primary energy rate and dwelling emission rate for a dwelling 
connected to a new district heat network, the calculation should include all heat sources to 
be used up to 31 December 2027. In this way, any planned transition of the heat network to an 
alternative means of heat generation will be properly accounted for. When there will be a change 
in heat source up to 31 December 2027, a submission to the building control body should be made 
to show both of the following.

a.  That planning permission, if required, has been granted for the change.

b.  That the heat network will connect to the new source, with confirmation in the form of a signed 

contract to connect and supply heat.

NOTE: When calculating the dwelling primary energy rate and dwelling emission rate for a dwelling 
connected to an existing district heat network the calculation should not include the effect of any 
change in heat sources after the dwellings are connected.

NOTE: An existing district heat network is defined in Appendix A. A new district heat network 
should be taken as meaning any other district heat network. 

NOTE: New dwellings connecting to an existing district heat network should follow the standards 
in Section 6.

Swimming pool basins
2.13  When calculating the dwelling primary energy rate, dwelling emission rate and dwelling fabric 

energy efficiency rate for a dwelling with a swimming pool, the thermal performance of the pool 
basin should not be included in the calculation. Instead, the dwelling primary energy rate, dwelling 
emission rate and dwelling fabric energy efficiency rate should be calculated as if the area covered 
by the pool were replaced with the equivalent area of floor with the same U-value as the pool 
surround.

Party walls
2.14  When calculating the dwelling primary energy rate, dwelling emission rate and dwelling fabric 

energy efficiency rate, a party wall U-value for the type of construction adopted should be applied 
as set out in Table 2.1.

Table 2.1  U-values for party walls

Party wall construction

Solid

Unfilled cavity with no effective edge sealing 

Unfilled cavity with effective sealing around all exposed edges and in alignment with 
insulation layers in abutting elements(1)

A fully filled cavity with effective sealing at all exposed edges and in alignment with 
insulation layers in abutting elements(1)

U-value W/(m2·K)

0.0

0.5

0.2

0.0

NOTE:
1. 

It is necessary to show that the edge sealing is likely to be robust under normal site conditions.

16  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R24-27CONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONInternal lighting in the dwelling emission rate and dwelling 
primary energy rate calculations
2.15  The calculations for both the dwelling primary energy rate and dwelling emission rate should 

account for the efficacy of lamps installed in the fixed lighting locations.

Achieving the target primary energy rate, target emission 
rate and target fabric energy efficiency rate
2.16  Provided the dwelling satisfies the minimum standards for fabric elements set out in Section 4, 

the designer can achieve the target primary energy rate and the target emission rate by using any 
combination of the following.

a.  Fabric energy efficiency.

b.  Efficient building services.

c.  Low and zero carbon technologies integrated in an appropriate mix. 

2.17  The designer can achieve the target fabric energy efficiency rate only through fabric energy 

efficiency. 

NOTE: To meet the target fabric energy efficiency rate, the energy efficiency of some elements will 
need to be significantly better than the minimum standards for fabric elements set out in Section 4.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

17

R24-27CONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONRegulation 25A: Consideration of high-
efficiency alternative systems

This section deals with the requirements of regulation 25A of the Building Regulations 2010.

Regulation

Consideration of high-efficiency alternative systems for new buildings
25A.  (1)   Before construction of a new building starts, the person who is to carry out the work must analyse and 

take into account the technical, environmental and economic feasibility of using high-efficiency alternative 
systems (such as the following systems) in the construction, if available—

(a)   decentralised energy supply systems based on energy from renewable sources;

(b)  cogeneration;

(c)   district or block heating or cooling, particularly where it is based entirely or partially on energy from 

renewable sources; and

(d)  heat pumps.

(2)  The person carrying out the work must—

(a)   not later than the beginning of the day before the day on which the work starts, give the local authority 

a notice which states that the analysis referred to in paragraph (1)—

(i)  has been undertaken;

(ii)  is documented; and

(iii) the documentation is available to the authority for verification purposes; and

(b)   ensure that a copy of the analysis is available for inspection at all reasonable times upon request by an 

officer of the local authority.

(3)   An authorised officer of the local authority may require production of the documentation in order to verify 

that this regulation has been complied with.

(4)  The analysis referred to in paragraph (1)—

(a)   may be carried out for individual buildings or for groups of similar buildings or for common typologies 

of buildings in the same area; and

(b)   in so far as it relates to collective heating and cooling systems, may be carried out for all buildings 

connected to the system in the same area.

18  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R25AONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regulation continued 

(5)  In this regulation—

(a)   “cogeneration” means simultaneous generation in one process of thermal energy and one or both of the 

following—

(i)  electrical energy;

(ii)  mechanical energy;

(b)   “district or block heating or cooling” means the distribution of thermal energy in the form of steam, hot 
water or chilled liquids, from a central source of production through a network of multiple buildings or 
sites, for the use of space or process heating or cooling;

(c)   “energy from renewable sources” means energy from renewable non-fossil sources, namely wind, solar, 
aerothermal, geothermal, hydrothermal and ocean energy, hydropower, biomass, landfill gas, sewage 
treatment plant gas and biogases; and

(d)   “heat pump” means a machine, a device or installation that transfers heat from natural surroundings such 
as air, water or ground to buildings or industrial applications by reversing the natural flow of heat such 
that it flows from a lower to a higher temperature. (For reversible heat pumps, it may also move heat 
from the building to the natural surroundings.)

NOTE: Where the building control body is an approved inspector, see regulation 20 of the Building 
(Approved Inspectors etc.) Regulations 2010 (as amended).

Intention

In the Secretary of State's view, regulation 25A is met in a new dwelling by analysing the feasibility of 
installing high-efficiency alternative systems, following Section 3.  

The Building Regulations do not require that high-efficiency alternative systems or other low or zero 
carbon systems are installed. 

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

19

R25AONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 3: Consideration of high-efficiency 
alternative systems

3.1  Before building work starts on a new dwelling, the person undertaking the building work must 

analyse the technical, environmental and economic feasibility of using high-efficiency alternative 
systems in the dwelling design. This analysis should be considered when designing the dwelling.

3.2  The building control body should be notified that the analysis of high-efficiency alternative 

systems has been undertaken, that it is documented and is available to be verified. The document 
should state whether high-efficiency alternative systems have been included in the dwelling design. 
The documented results of the analysis should be retained for the building control body to inspect 
upon request.

3.3  The analysis may be made for individual dwellings, groups of similar dwellings, or for common 

types of dwellings in the same area. Where a number of dwellings are connected to a district heat 
network or community heating system, a single analysis may be made for all dwellings connected 
to the network or system. 

3.4  When a dwelling undergoes a major renovation, the technical, environmental and economic 

feasibility of installing high-efficiency alternative systems should be considered.

20  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R25AONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONRequirement L1(a): Limiting heat gains  
and losses

This section deals with the requirements of Part L1(a) of Schedule 1 to the Building Regulations 2010.

Limits on application

Requirement

Requirement

Schedule 1 – Part L Conservation of fuel and power

L1. 

 Reasonable provision shall be made for the 
conservation of fuel and power in buildings by— 

  (a)  limiting heat gains and losses—

(i)   through thermal elements and other parts 

of the building fabric; and

(ii)   from pipes, ducts and vessels used for 

space heating, space cooling and hot water 
services; 

  (b)  providing fixed building services which—

(i)   are energy efficient to a reasonable standard;

(ii)  have effective controls; and

(iii)  are commissioned by testing and adjusting 
as necessary to ensure they use no more 
fuel and power than is reasonable in the 
circumstances.

Intention

In the Secretary of State’s view, requirement L1(a) is met in a new dwelling by achieving both of the 
following. 

a.  Unwanted heat losses from the dwelling are limited by meeting the standards for all of the 

following.

i.  The building fabric, including walls, floors, roof, windows and openings – paragraphs 4.1 to 

4.6 and paragraphs 4.14 to 4.19.

ii.  Airtightness – paragraphs 4.20 to 4.22.

iii.  The pipework and services – paragraphs 4.24 and 4.26 to 4.32.

b.  Unwanted heat gains to the dwelling, throughout the year, through any of the routes listed in (a) 

above, are limited as set out in Section 4.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

21

L1(a)ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
In the Secretary of State’s view, requirement L1(a) is met for work on an existing dwelling by achieving 
both of the following, where relevant to the work being done. 

a.  Unwanted heat losses from the dwelling are limited by meeting the standards for all of the 

following.

i.  Any building fabric to which building work is being done, including walls, floors, roof, 
windows and openings – paragraphs 4.1 to 4.5 and paragraphs 4.7 to 4.14, 4.16 and 4.19. 
Further guidance is given in the following sections. 

•  For new elements, replacement elements and extensions – Section 10.

•  For renovated elements, retained elements, a change to energy status and a material 

change of use – Section 11.

ii.  Any work that may result in making airtightness worse – paragraph 4.23. 

b.  Unwanted heat gains from any pipework and services to which building work is being done are 

limited by following the guidance in paragraphs 4.24 to 4.32.

NOTE: If work includes an extension to an existing dwelling, initial provision of fixed building 
services or an increase to the installed capacity of fixed building services, consequential 
improvements may be required – Section 12.  

22  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

L1(a)ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONSection 4: Limiting heat gains and losses

U-values 
4.1  U-values should be assessed using the methods and conventions set out in the Building Research 
Establishment’s BR 443. U-values should be assessed for the whole fabric element (e.g. in the case 
of a window, the combined performance of the glazing and the frame).

4.2  The U-value of a window should be assessed using one of the following methods.

a.  Calculated using the actual size and configuration of the window.

b.  Calculated for a standard window 1.23m (±25%) wide × 1.48m (–25%) high and the actual 

configuration of the window.

c.  Calculated for a standard window 1.23m (±25%) wide × 1.48m (–25%) high and one of the 

following standard configurations.

i.  For a casement window, a central vertical divider with one opening light and one fixed light.

ii.  For a vertical sliding sash window, a central horizontal divider with two opening lights.

iii.  For a roof window, no divider.

d.  Measured using the hot-box method as set out in BS EN ISO 12567-1 for windows and  

BS EN ISO 12567-2 for roof windows.

4.3  The U-value of a door should be assessed using one of the following methods.

a.  Calculated using the actual size and configuration of the door.

b.  Calculated using one of the following standard sizes. 

i. 

1.23m (±25%) wide × 2.18m (±25%) high, for doors ≤ 3.6m².

ii.  2.00m (±25%) wide × 2.18m (±25%) high, for doors > 3.6m².

NOTE: When a single U-value is calculated for a product range of doors, the configuration of the 
door chosen for the calculation should be the worst performing in the product range. 

c.  Measured using the hot-box method as set out in BS EN ISO 12567-1.

4.4  Alternatively, for doors or windows, the default value from the Standard Assessment Procedure 

Table 6e can be used. 

4.5  To correctly assess whether an element meets the limiting U-value, the U-value must be calculated for 
the element in the appropriate plane – either horizontal or vertical. For windows and roof windows, 
U-values should be calculated based on a vertical position. For rooflights, U-values should be calculated 
based on a horizontal position. If the data available for the element is in the incorrect plane, it should be 
adjusted according to the guidance in the Building Research Establishment’s BR 443.

NOTE: This does not apply to Standard Assessment Procedure calculations, where the U-value of 
each element is calculated based on the plane in which it is constructed or installed.

Limiting standards in new dwellings 
4.6  Insulating fabric elements in new dwellings should meet the limiting standards in Table 4.1.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

23

L1(a)ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONElement type

All roof types(2) 

Wall(2)

Floor

Party wall

Swimming pool basin(3)

Window(4)(5)

Rooflight(6)(7)

Doors (including glazed doors)

Air permeability 

Maximum U-value(1) W/(m2·K)

0.16

0.26

0.18

0.20

0.25

1.6

2.2

1.6

8.0m3/(h·m2) @ 50Pa
1.57m3/(h·m2) @ 4Pa

NOTES:
1.  Area-weighted average values.
2.  For dormer windows, ‘roof’ includes the roof parts of the windows and ‘wall’ includes the wall parts (cheeks).
3.  The U-value of a swimming pool basin (walls and floor) calculated according to BS EN ISO 13370.
4. 

If performance requires thicker glass to be used, an equivalent window unit with standard thickness (6mm) glazing 
should be shown to meet the required standard.
Including roof windows and curtain walling.

5. 
6.  U-values for rooflights or rooflight-and-kerb assemblies should be based on the developed surface area of the 
rooflight (Ud-values), which is often greater than the area of the roof opening. Further guidance on Ud-values is 
given in the Building Research Establishment’s BR 443 and the National Association of Rooflight Manufacturers’ 
Technical Document NTD02.

7.  The limiting value for rooflights also applies to kerbs that are supplied as part of a single rooflight-and-kerb 

assembly sourced from the same supplier and for which the supplier can provide a combined Ud-value for the 
assembly. An upstand built on site should not exceed a U-value of 0.35W/(m2·K).

NOTE: To meet the target fabric energy efficiency rate set out in Section 1, the energy efficiency  
of some elements will need to be significantly better than the limiting standards in Table 4.1.

Limiting standards in existing dwellings

New and replacement elements 
4.7  New fabric elements in existing dwellings should meet the limiting standards in Table 4.2. 
4.8  The U-value of a replacement fabric element in an existing dwelling should both:

a.  be no worse than that of the element being replaced

b.  meet the limiting standards in Table 4.2.

4.9  Guidance on when a new element must meet the standards in Table 4.2 is given in Section 10. 

Elements that should meet the standards include both of the following. 

a.  Elements in extensions to existing dwellings. 

b.  New or replacement elements in existing dwellings. 

4.10  If windows or fully glazed external pedestrian doors cannot meet the requirements of Table 4.2 because 

of the need to maintain the character of the building, either of the following should be met.

a.  These fittings should not exceed a centre pane U-value of 1.2W/(m2·K).

b.  Single glazing should be supplemented with low-emissivity secondary glazing.

24  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

L1(a)Table 4.1 Limiting U-values for new fabric elements and air permeability in new dwellingsONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONElement type

Roof(2) 

Wall(2)(3)

Floor(4)(5)

Swimming pool basin(6)

Window(7)(8)(9)

Rooflight(11)(12)

Maximum U-value(1) W/(m2·K)

0.15

0.18

0.18

0.25

1.4 or Window Energy Rating(10) Band B minimum

2.2

Doors with >60% of internal face glazed(13)

1.4 or Doorset Energy Rating(10) Band C minimum

Other doors(13)(14)

1.4 or Doorset Energy Rating(10) Band B minimum

NOTES:
1.  Area-weighted average values, except for windows, doors, roof windows and rooflights.
2.  For dormer windows, ‘roof’ includes the roof parts of the windows and ‘wall’ includes the wall parts (cheeks).
3. 

If meeting such a standard would reduce the internal floor area of the room bounded by the wall by more than 5%, 
a lesser provision may be appropriate. 
If meeting such a standard would create significant problems in relation to adjoining floor levels, a lesser provision 
may be appropriate. 

4. 

5.  The U-value of the floor of an extension may be calculated using the exposed perimeter and floor area of the whole 

enlarged dwelling.

6.  The U-value of a swimming pool basin (walls and floor) calculated according to BS EN ISO 13370.
7. 

If other performance (e.g. wind load, safety, security or acoustic attenuation) requires thicker glass to be used, an 
equivalent window unit with standard thickness (6mm) glazing should be shown to meet the required standard.
Including roof windows and curtain walling.

8. 
9.  For timber windows, a maximum U-value of 1.6 W/(m2·K) or Window Energy Rating Band C is permissible until  
14 June 2023. This is to give manufacturers time to transition to the standard in this Table 4.2. From 15 June 2023 
the full standard of 1.4 W/(m2·K) or Window Energy Rating Band B applies.

10.  The methods for calculating Window Energy Rating and Doorset Energy Rating are set out in the Glass and 

Glazing Federation’s Glazing Manual Data Sheet 2.3, Guide to the Calculation of Energy Ratings for Windows, Roof 
Windows and Doors.

11.  U-values for rooflights or rooflight-and-kerb assemblies should be based on the outer developed surface area, which  
is often greater than the area of the roof opening. Further guidance on Ud-values is given in the Building Research 
Establishment’s BR 443 and the National Association of Rooflight Manufacturers’ Technical Document NTD02.

12.  The limiting value for rooflights also applies to kerbs that are supplied as part of a single rooflight-and-kerb 

assembly sourced from the same supplier and for which the supplier can provide a combined Ud-value for the 
assembly. An upstand built on site should have a maximum U-value of 0.35W/(m2·K).

13.  For timber doors, a maximum U-value of 1.8 W/(m2·K) or Doorset Energy Rating Band E is permissible until 14 June 
2023. This is to give manufacturers time to transition to the standard in this Table 4.2. From 15 June 2023 the full 
standard of 1.4 W/(m2·K) applies.

14.  For external fire doorsets, as defined in Appendix A of Approved Document B, Volume 1, a maximum U-value of 

1.8W/(m2·K) is permissible.

Renovated and retained elements 
4.11  The U-value of an existing thermal element that is being renovated should both:

a.  be no worse than that of the element before it was renovated

b.  meet the limiting standards in Table 4.3.

4.12  Guidance on when an existing element should meet the standards in Table 4.3 is given in Section 11. 

Elements that should meet the standards include both of the following. 

a.  Thermal elements being renovated in existing dwellings. Renovated elements should achieve the 

U-values in Table 4.3, column (b). 

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

25

L1(a)Table 4.2 Limiting U-values for new fabric elements in existing dwellingsONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONb.  Elements being retained in existing dwellings, for example through a loft or garage conversion. 

Retained elements with a U-value that is higher than the threshold value in Table 4.3, column (a) 
should be upgraded to achieve the U-values in Table 4.3, column (b).

4.13  If achieving the U-value in Table 4.3, column (b) either:
is not technically or functionally feasible or

a. 

b.  would not achieve a simple payback of 15 years or less

then the element should be upgraded to the lowest U-value that both:

a. 

is technically and functionally feasible and

b.  can achieve a simple payback not exceeding 15 years.

Generally, a thermal element once upgraded should not have a U-value greater than 0.7W/(m2·K). A 
lesser standard for the thermal element may be acceptable where work complies with Part C of the 
Building Regulations on protection from the harmful effects of interstitial and surface condensation. 

NOTE: Examples are given in Appendix C.
NOTE: When renovating thermal elements, the work should comply with all the requirements in 
Schedule 1, but particular attention should be paid to Parts B, C, F and J. 

Table 4.3  Limiting U-values for existing elements in existing dwellings

Element

Roof(2)(3)(4)

Wall – cavity insulation(2)(5)

Wall – internal or external insulation(2)(6)

Floor(7)(8)

NOTES:
1.  Area-weighted average values.

U-value(1) W/(m2·K)

(a) Threshold

(b) Improved

0.35

0.70

0.70

0.70

0.16

0.55

0.30

0.25

2.  For dormer windows, ‘roof’ includes the roof parts of the windows and ‘wall’ includes the wall parts (cheeks).

3. 

If meeting such a standard would limit head room, a lesser standard may be appropriate. In such cases, both of 
the following should be achieved.

a.  The depth of the insulation plus any required air gap should be at least to the depth of the rafters.

b.  The insulant should be chosen to achieve the lowest practicable U-value.

4. 

If there are problems with the load-bearing capacity of the frame or height of the upstand, for a flat roof or roof 
with integral insulation, a lesser standard may be appropriate.

5.  This applies only to a wall that is suitable for cavity insulation. Where this is not the case, it should be treated as 

‘wall – internal or external insulation’.

6. 

If meeting such a standard would reduce the internal floor area of the room bounded by the wall by more than 
5%, a lesser standard may be appropriate.

7.  The U-value of the floor of an extension may be calculated using the exposed perimeter and floor area of the 

whole enlarged dwelling.

8. 

If meeting such a standard would create significant problems in relation to adjoining floor levels, a lesser standard 
may be appropriate.

26  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

L1(a)ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONContinuity of insulation
4.14  Gaps in insulation can have a significant impact on heat loss and thermal bypass and create a risk 
of condensation and mould. The building fabric should be constructed so that the insulation is 
reasonably continuous across newly built elements. 

4.15  To ensure continuity of insulation in new dwellings, all of the following apply.

a.  Drawings should identify the insulation layer. The designer and installer should review drawings 

to ensure the insulation layer is continuous, buildable and robust.

b.  Before elements are concealed by subsequent work, an on-site audit should be undertaken to 
confirm that the designed details have been constructed. Photographs of the details should be 
taken in line with the guidance in Appendix B.

c.  Floors and foundations: insulation should be installed tight to the structure, without air gaps 

between insulation panels and at edges.

i.  Perimeter insulation should be continuous and have a minimum thickness of 25mm.

ii.  Moisture-resistant insulation should be fitted below damp-proof course level and extend to 

the foundation block/structure. 

d.  Windows and doors: should be installed in such a way that the thermal integrity of the insulated 

plane is maintained.

i.  Tolerance around a window or door unit and the surrounding opening should be minimal 

and be in accordance with BS 8213-4.

ii.  Position: window or door units should be located with an overlap between the inner face 

of the unit and the inner face of the external leaf – for windows an overlap between 30mm 
and 50mm, and for doors 50mm – so that the window or door unit is contiguous with the 
insulation layer of the external wall. 

iii.  Fully insulated and continuous cavity closers should be used, installed tight to the insulation 
and cavity apertures. For door units, install perimeter insulation within the threshold zone 
or use a reinforced cavity closure.

e.  Walls: insulation should be fitted without any air gaps and tight to the structure, cavity closers, 
lintels and cavity trays. Mortar snots should be removed to ensure a tight fit with the structure 
and cavities cleared of all debris. Where fire-stopping socks are required, these should fully fill 
the areas where they are fitted, including at the heads of cavities.

f.  Roofs: insulation should be installed tight to the structure, without air gaps, and should extend 
to the wall insulation. For roofs insulated at ceiling level, the long-term protection of the 
insulation layer should be considered: boarded areas should be provided above the insulation to 
give access for maintenance.

g.  Rigid insulation boards: should only be used on flat surfaces. Boards should be fitted to the 
structure to avoid any gaps between board edges and between the board facings. The use of 
boards with lapped or tongue and groove edges should be considered. Any unavoidable gaps 
between boards should be infilled using compressible tape (e.g. for boards within roof rafters) or 
low expansion foam (e.g. for boards within wall cavities). 

h.  Penetrating elements include steel beams, incoming services, meter boxes and sub-floor vents. 
Designs should clearly indicate means to limit disruption to the insulation. For recessed meter 
boxes on the cold side of the construction, insulation should be installed behind the enclosure. 
For incoming services, insulation should fit tightly around ducts, pipes, etc. 

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

27

L1(a)ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONThermal bridging
4.16  Thermal bridges occur when an area of a building has significantly higher heat transfer than the 
surrounding parts. Breaks in insulation, reduced insulation or more conductive materials can 
contribute to thermal bridge effects. The building fabric should be constructed so that thermal 
bridging, including at the party wall, is reasonably limited.

Thermal bridging in new dwellings
4.17  To limit thermal bridging in new dwellings, all of the following apply. 

a.  Drawings should be provided for junctions. The designer and installer should review drawings to 
check that junctions are buildable and to ensure construction sequencing is carefully considered 
for each detail. Complex details should be avoided wherever possible. 

b.  Before elements are concealed by subsequent work, an on-site audit should be undertaken to 
confirm that the designed details have been constructed. Photographs of the details should be 
taken in line with Appendix B.

c.  Product specification: opportunities should be considered to use products that help to reduce 

thermal bridges. Options include both of the following.

i.  Masonry construction: lightweight blockwork in the inner leaf of a cavity wall or both 

leaves of a party wall can help to reduce thermal transmittance, particularly at junctions, 
such as the ground floor to wall junction.

ii.  Timber construction: the use of insulated plasterboard on the inside of the frame can help 

to reduce bridging at various junctions. 

d.  Product substitution: the products used should be those shown in the original design. If a 

product is substituted, the revised specification should be reflected in the SAP calculation and 
report in the Building Regulations England Part L compliance report (BREL report). 

e.  Foundations: wherever possible, blocks below the damp-proof course should be the same as 

those specified in the design for the above-ground main wall element (in masonry construction). 

f.  Ground floors and external walls: the wall-to-floor junctions should be detailed to achieve 

continuity of insulation. 

i.  Perimeter floor insulation should abut or extend the full depth of the main floor insulation.

ii.  Masonry construction: external or cavity wall insulation should extend below the damp-
proof course (where applicable) and be at least the equivalent of one full block height 
(215mm) below the underside of the floor structure/slab and beyond the depth of the floor 
insulation.

iii.  Timber construction: insulation between boards/within sheathing should extend to the 

floor plate. The wall insulation and the floor perimeter insulation should abut.

g. 

Intermediate floors: floor-to-wall junctions should be detailed to ensure that insulation in the 
external wall is continuous. For a timber frame where the intermediate floor structure breaches 
the external wall insulation, further insulation – of the same thickness as the insulation used in 
the external wall – should be included within the depth of the intermediate floor structure.

28  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

L1(a)ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONh.  Windows: designs should minimise thermal bridging. 

i.  Lintels: consider using independent lintels with an insulated cavity closure between the 

inner and outer lintel. For common leaf lintels, the base plate should not be continuous and 
the lintel core should be insulated.

ii. 

Insulated cavity closers should be used for all construction types. Additionally, insulated 
plasterboard should be used in reveals to abut jambs and should be considered within 
reveal soffits. 

i.  Roofs: continue the insulation across the wall-to-eaves and wall-to-gable junctions. 

i.  Wall insulation should be installed to the top of the wall plate; in some places, such as the 
eaves, this may be above the cavity closure or barrier. In all cases, roof insulation should be 
continuous with wall insulation.

ii.  Roofs insulated at ceiling level: loft insulation at the eaves should extend beyond the 

wall insulation without any reduction in thickness due to the pitch of the roof. The roof 
insulation should be installed when the eaves are still accessible. At gables and party walls, 
insulation should extend to the wall; if the space between the wall and joist is less than 
100mm, perimeter insulation may be required.

iii.  Roofs insulated at rafter level: at the eaves, insulation should extend to the top of the 

external wall. Voids between insulation at the top of the external wall and the cavity wall/
timber frame insulation should be fully filled with insulation.

NOTE: Any solution to edge sealing or thermal bridging in new dwellings should take account of 
Part E of the Building Regulations.

4.18  Thermal bridges should be assessed in a new dwelling using one of the following methods.

a.  Use construction joint details calculated by a suitably competent person following the guidance 

in the Building Research Establishment’s BR 497 and the temperature factors set out in the 
Building Research Establishment’s Information Paper 1/06.

b.  Use junction details from a reputable non-government database containing independently 

assessed thermal junction details, such as Local Authority Building Control’s Construction Details 
library.

c.  Use the values in the Standard Assessment Procedure, Table K1. A mixture of known and default 

values may be used.

d.  Use a default y-value of 0.20W/(m2.K).

NOTE: A mix of approaches may be used for different elements on the same dwelling. When using 
the approach in (a) or (b) above, an appropriate system of site inspection should be in place.

Thermal bridging in existing dwellings
4.19  When carrying out work in existing dwellings, care should be taken to reduce unwanted heat loss 
through thermal bridging. Thermal bridges can be limited in an existing dwelling by following the 
junction details from a reputable non-government database containing independently assessed 
thermal junction details, such as Local Authority Building Control’s Construction Details library. 
Follow the guidance in paragraph 4.17 where appropriate.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

29

L1(a)ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONAirtightness

Airtightness in new dwellings
4.20 The minimum standard for air permeability of a new dwelling is given in Table 4.1. When carrying out 
work in new dwellings, care should be taken to reduce unwanted heat loss through air infiltration. 

4.21  To ensure airtightness in new dwellings, all of the following apply.

a.  Drawings: all relevant drawings should be provided to clearly identify the position, continuity 
and extent of the air barrier. Drawings should be reviewed by the designer and installer and 
should include specifications for key materials.

b.  Incoming services: ducts, and cables wherever possible, should be grouped to minimise how 

often the air barrier is penetrated, while ensuring sufficient space to allow adequate screed flow 
between ducts. (Use temporary supports for services during floor works.) Grommets or flexible 
collars should be used around incoming services and sealed to the air barrier with air-sealing 
tape or sealant.

c. 

Internal building services: where services penetrate the air barrier, holes should be as small as 
possible and should be core drilled to limit damage. The penetrating services should be sealed 
to the air barrier using proprietary grommets or collars with air-sealing tape or sealant. Where 
membranes are penetrated, careful detailing should be used to achieve a robust and durable seal 
at these penetrations. 

d.  Structural penetrations need to be effectively sealed for airtightness. Timber joist hangers 

should be considered as an alternative to penetrating through the inner leaf.

e.  Cavity walls: the inner block leaf mortar joint should be fully filled and pointed within the cavity. 
Where dense aggregate blocks have been used, plaster, parge coat or liquid membranes should 
be applied internally to reduce air permeability. Internal plasterboard linings are not appropriate 
for use as an air barrier solution.

f.  Timber frame: the vapour control layer should overlap at seams and junctions and be taped 
where it forms the airtightness barrier. Any damage, such as tears, should be repaired before 
boarding. Where sheathing board forms the air barrier, air-sealing tape should be applied at 
junctions and edges.

g.  Fixings: care should be taken to ensure that fixings do not damage the airtightness barrier. 
h.  Windows and doors: to ensure continuity of the air barrier, window and door units should 

connect to the primary air barrier and window and door frames should be taped to surrounding 
structural openings, using air sealing tape. Compressible seals or gun sealant may be used to 
supplement taping. 

i.  Loft hatches: where the roof is insulated at ceiling level, hatches should be suitably designed 

and installed to ensure optimum airtightness.

4.22 To avoid air movement within thermal elements, either of the following measures should be 

implemented.

a.  The insulation layer should abut the air barrier at all points in the building envelope.

b.  The space between the air barrier and the insulation layer should be filled with solid material.

30  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

L1(a)ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONAirtightness in existing dwellings
4.23 When carrying out work in existing dwellings, care should be taken to reduce unwanted heat loss 

through air infiltration by doing all of the following.

a.  When installing pipework or services, taping and sealing around service penetrations.

b.  When installing or renovating thermal elements, the element being installed should be draught-

proofed, and air-leakage gaps should be filled.

c.  When installing windows, roof windows, rooflights or doors (all of which are controlled fittings), 

the controlled fitting should be well fitted and reasonably draught-proof.

NOTE: Particular attention should be paid to Approved Document F and Approved Document J 
when making an existing dwelling more airtight.

Limiting heat losses and gains from building services

Hot water and heating pipework
4.24 In a new system, all of the following new pipework should be insulated.

a.  Primary circulation pipes for heating circuits where they pass outside the heated living space, 

including where pipework passes into voids.

b.  All primary circulation pipes for domestic hot water.

c.  All pipes that are connected to hot water storage vessels, for at least 1m from the point at which 

they connect to the vessel.

d.  All secondary circulation pipework.

4.25 In an existing system, when a boiler or hot water storage vessel is replaced, any accessible pipes in 

the dwelling should be insulated. 

4.26 Heat losses from insulated pipework should not exceed those given in BS 5422 for hot water 

services at 60°C, regardless of the actual design temperature. Meeting the standards in Table 4.4 is 
one way of demonstrating that heat losses will not exceed those given in BS 5422.

Nominal internal pipe diameter (mm)

Minimum insulation thickness(1) (mm) for 
low temperature hot water systems

Less than or equal to 10

Less than or equal to 25

Less than or equal to 50

Less than or equal to 100

5

10

15

20

NOTE:
1.   Thicknesses apply for insulation with a thermal conductivity of 0.025W/(m·K) or better. For other circumstances, 

consult BS 5422.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

31

L1(a)Table 4.4  Minimum thicknesses of pipework insulation for hot water services and space heating applications using high performance insulationONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONExternal pipework for district heat networks
4.27 Pipework for district heat networks should be insulated to meet either of the following.

a.  The standards in BS EN 253 for pre-insulated pipes.
b.  An equivalent performance for conventionally insulated pipes.

4.28 Where pipework is above ground, the performance of the pipe insulation should be at least as high 

as the insulating performance of pipework in the buried part of the system.

Heated water storage for space or domestic hot water
4.29 Vessels that store heated water for a heating or domestic hot water system should have standing 

losses that do not exceed the heat loss given in Table 4.5 for that system type.

Nominal volume (litres)

Heat loss (kWh/24h)

Nominal volume (litres)

Heat loss (kWh/24h)

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

1.03

1.49

1.88

2.06

2.22

2.36

2.48

400

500

600

700

800

900

1000

2.59

2.80

2.98

3.14

3.29

3.44

3.57

NOTE:
1.   For sizes of cylinder not listed, the heat loss from the cylinder should not exceed (16.66 + 8.33 � V0.4)/(1000 ÷ 24), 

where V is the volume in litres. 

4.30 Hot water storage vessels should comply with all of the following.

a.  Copper hot water storage combination units should comply with BS 3198. 
b.  Vented cylinders should comply with the heat loss and heat exchanger requirements of BS 1566-1 

or BS EN 12897 as appropriate. 

c.  Unvented hot water storage system products should comply with BS EN 12897.

4.31  Primary storage systems should meet the insulation requirements of the Hot Water Association’s 

Performance Specification for Thermal Stores.

Heat interface units
4.32 Vessels that store heated water for a heating or domestic hot water system should have standing 

losses that do not exceed the heat loss given in Table 4.5 for that system type.

32  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

L1(a)Table 4.5    Maximum daily heat loss for a hot water cylinder(1)ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONL1(b), L2
Requirements L1(b)(i), (ii) and L2: Fixed building 
services energy efficiency and controls and 
on-site generation of electricity

This section deals with the requirements of Part L1(b)(i), (ii) and L2 of Schedule 1 to the Building 
Regulations 2010.

Limits on application

Requirement

Requirement

Schedule 1 – Part L Conservation of fuel and power

L1. 

 Reasonable provision shall be made for the 
conservation of fuel and power in buildings by— 

  (a)  limiting heat gains and losses—

(i)   through thermal elements and other parts of 

the building fabric; and

(ii)   from pipes, ducts and vessels used for 

space heating, space cooling and hot water 
services; 

  (b) providing fixed building services which—

(i)   are energy efficient to a reasonable 

standard;

(ii)  have effective controls; and

(iii)  are commissioned by testing and adjusting 
as necessary to ensure they use no more 
fuel and power than is reasonable in the 
circumstances.

On-site generation of electricity

L2.  Where a system for on-site electricity generation is 

installed—

(a)   reasonable provision must be made to ensure 

that—

(i)   the system and its electrical output are 

appropriately sized for the site and available 
infrastructure;

(ii)   the system has effective controls; and

(b)   it must be commissioned by testing and 

adjusting as necessary to ensure that it produces 
the maximum electricity that is reasonable in 
the circumstances.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

33

ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSION 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
L1(b), L2

Intention

In the Secretary of State’s view, requirements L1(b)(i), (ii) and L2 are met in a new dwelling by achieving 
all of the following. 

a.  Fixed building services that both:

i.  meet the minimum efficiencies in Section 6

ii.  are appropriately sized, following paragraphs 5.8, 5.9 and 5.11 to 5.13

b.  Controls to fixed building services are provided that both: 

i.  meet the general controls for heating and hot water systems in paragraphs 5.14 to 5.22

ii.  meet the system specific controls in Section 6.  

c.  Any on-site electricity generation is both appropriately sized and has controls.

In the Secretary of State’s view, requirements L1(b)(i), (ii) and L2 are met in an existing dwelling by 
achieving all of the following.

a.  Fixed building services that both:

i.  meet the minimum efficiencies in Section 6 and the criteria in paragraphs 5.4 and 5.5

ii.  are appropriately sized, following paragraphs 5.8 to 5.13.

b.  Any fixed building services installed have controls that both: 

i.  meet the standards for general controls for heating and hot water systems in  

paragraphs 5.14 to 5.27

ii.  meet the standards for system specific controls in Section 6.  

c.  Any on-site electricity generation provided is both appropriately sized, following paragraph 5.6, 

and has controls.

34  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONL1(b), L2

Section 5: Minimum building services 
efficiencies and controls – general guidance

New building services
5.1  For each new fixed building service in a new or existing dwelling, the efficiency of the service 
should be no lower than the value set out in Section 6. If a proposed service is not covered in 
Section 6, the service should be shown to be no less efficient than a comparable service that is 
covered. 

5.2  Both of the following apply to the efficiency claimed for a fixed building service.

a.  The efficiency should be based on the appropriate test standard set out in Section 6. 

b.  The test data should be certified by a notified body. 

5.3  For heating and hot water systems in new dwellings, paragraphs 5.8 to 5.19 should be followed, in 

addition to the system specific guidance in Section 6.  

Replacement building services in existing dwellings 
5.4  A replacement fixed building service should be at least as efficient as the value set out in Section 6 

and should comply with either of the following. 

a.  Use the same fuel as the service being replaced and have an efficiency that is not worse than 

that of the service being replaced.

b.  Use a different fuel than the service being replaced. The system should both: 

i.  not produce more CO2 emissions per kWh of heat than the appliance being replaced
ii.  not have a higher primary energy demand per kWh of heat than the appliance being replaced. 

Worked example 

Replacing an old oil-fired boiler with emissions of 0.298kgCO2/kWh and primary energy of 
1.180kWhPE/kWh at 85% efficiency with an LPG boiler with emissions of 0.241kgCO2/kWh and primary 
energy of 1.141kWhPE/kWh at 93% efficiency.  
CO2 emissions

Oil-fired boiler: 

LPG boiler: 

0.298/0.85 = 0.35kgCO2/kWh 
0.241/0.93 = 0.26kgCO2/kWh 

Primary energy 

Oil-fired boiler: 

LPG boiler: 

1.180/0.85= 1.39kWhPE/kWh
1.141/0.93 = 1.23kWhPE/kWh 

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

35

ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSION 
 
 
 
The new LPG boiler has both lower CO2 emissions and primary energy than the oil-fired boiler being 
replaced, and therefore complies. It is also at least as efficient as the minimum efficiency as set out in 
Section 6 of this guidance.

NOTE: If the efficiency of the appliance being replaced is not known, the Standard Assessment 
Procedure, Tables 4a and 4b, should be used but with no adjustments from Tables 4c and 4d. 
CO2 emission factors and primary energy factors should be taken from the Standard Assessment 
Procedure Table 12.

NOTE: Where a heat pump is installed which meets the minimum efficiency standards in this 
approved document, it should be deemed to be compliant with paragraph 5.4, without the need to 
carry out this calculation.

5.5  Where a replacement fixed building service involves a fuel-switch in a home with very low heat 
loss a higher primary energy for the new heating appliance may be acceptable. For example, 
replacing a gas boiler with direct electric heaters as part of a deep retrofit project, where the 
resulting heat loss of the dwelling is less than 25kWh/m2 per year.

5.6  If renewable technology such as a wind turbine or photovoltaic array is replaced, the new system 
should have an electrical output that is at least the same as that of the original installation. 

5.7  Facilitating future connection to any local district heat networks should be considered (e.g. providing 
capped off connections in pipework to allow later connection to a local district heat network). 

Sizing heating and hot water systems 

Sizing space heating systems
5.8  The specification of space heating systems should be based on both of the following.

a.  An appropriate heat loss calculation for the dwelling.

b.  A sizing methodology that takes account of the properties of the dwelling, such as the 

Chartered Institute of Plumbing and Heating Engineering’s Plumbing Engineering Services  
Design Guide. 

Systems should not be significantly oversized. 

5.9  Where a gas combination boiler is used, the boiler type should be selected to modulate down to 

the typical heating load of the dwelling.

5.10  Where a wet heating system is either:

a.  newly installed

b.  fully replaced in an existing building, including the heating appliance, emitters and associated 

pipework 

all parts of the system including pipework and emitters should be sized to allow the space heating 
system to operate effectively and in a manner that meets the heating needs of the dwelling, at a 
maximum flow temperature of 55°C or lower. 

Where it is not feasible to install a space heating system that can operate at this temperature (e.g. 
where there is insufficient space for larger radiators, or the existing distribution system is provided 
with higher temperature heat from a low carbon district heat network), the space heating system 
should be designed to the lowest design temperature possible that will still meet the heating needs 
of the dwelling. 

36  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

L1(b), L2ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONNOTE: Low temperature requirements apply to space heating only. Further guidance can be found in the 
Building Research Establishment’s FB 59 Design of Low-temperature Domestic Heating Systems.

Sizing domestic hot water systems
5.11  Domestic hot water systems should be sized for the anticipated domestic hot water demand of the 
dwelling, based on BS EN 12831-3 or the Chartered Institute of Plumbing and Heating Engineering’s 
Plumbing Engineering Services Design Guide. Systems should not be significantly oversized.

NOTE: For temperature limits to control legionella bacteria in domestic hot water systems, see 
Approved Document G.

Sizing heat pump heating systems
5.12  Heat pumps should be selected to meet the full space heating requirement at the design condition 

chosen for heat loss calculations. This selection should account for the space heating flow 
temperature assumed in the heat emitter circuit(s), and not assume any heat will be supplied by 
additional electric heaters within the design external temperature range.

5.13  Reversible heat pump systems (i.e. those that provide both cooling and heating functions) should 

be designed such that they are optimised for heating.

Controls

System controls and zoning 
5.14  For wet heating systems in new dwellings with a floor area of 150m2 or greater, a minimum of two 

independently controlled heating circuits should be provided.

5.15  System controls should be wired so that when there is no demand for space heating or hot water 

the heating appliance and pump are switched off.

5.16  Domestic hot water circuits that are supplied from a hot water store should have both of the following.

a.  Time control that is independent of space heating circuits.

b.  Electronic temperature control.

5.17  Primary hot water circuits for domestic hot water or heating should have fully pumped circulation 

where this is compatible with the heat generator. 

5.18  Wet heating systems should ensure a minimum flow of water to avoid short-cycling.
5.19  For space heating systems, temperature control should be installed for the heating appliance. 

Thermostatic room controls
5.20 For heating systems in new dwellings, or when a heat generator such as a boiler is replaced in an 

existing dwelling, each room should be provided with thermostatic room controls. These should be 
capable of  being used to separately adapt the heating output in each room served by the heating 
appliance. Where justified in accordance with paragraph 5.21, heating may be controlled for each 
heating zone rather than individual rooms.

NOTE: There is no need to install thermostatic room controls in rooms/zones without heating in 
new or existing dwellings.

NOTE: Installing thermostatic room controls may not be technically feasible in some cases. These 
may include the following.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

37

L1(b), L2ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONa.  Dwellings with very low heat demand (e.g. less than 10W/m2).

b.  Dwelling with buffer zones for heat absorption or dissipation with high thermal mass.

5.21  It may be justified to control a heating zone rather than individual rooms in either of the  

following cases.

a. 

In single-storey open-plan dwellings in which the living area is greater than 70% of the total 
floor area. In such cases, the dwelling should be considered as a single heating zone.

b.  Where two adjacent rooms have a similar function and heating requirements (e.g. kitchen and 
utility room). In such cases, the adjacent rooms should be considered as a single heating zone.

NOTE: Exhaust air heat pump systems, which extract heat from the exhaust air of a dwelling, may 
not need to provide independent thermostatic control to individual rooms. Providing room/
zone control on this type of system is unlikely to be economically and/or technically viable. 
However, other space heating systems also in use in the same dwelling should be controlled using 
thermostatic room controls as described above.

NOTE: Commissioning heating systems is covered in Section 8.

5.22 The standards in paragraphs 5.20 and 5.21 may be satisfied by providing any of the following.

a.  Both of the following.

i.  A thermostat in a room that the heating circuit serves.

ii.  An individual thermostatic room control for each heat emitter, such as a thermostatic 
radiator valve, on all heat emitters outside the room that contains the thermostat. 
Thermostatic radiator valves should not be used in the same room as the thermostat.

b.  An individual room/heating zone thermostat or fan coil thermostat for each room or heating 

zone.

c.  An individual networked heat emitter control for each emitter.

Controls in existing heating and domestic hot water systems
5.23 In addition to paragraphs 5.20 to 5.22, work on existing systems should incorporate the controls 

detailed in paragraphs 5.24 to 5.27. 

5.24 If domestic hot water and space heating are controlled by a single time controller in the existing 

system, then these may continue to be controlled together after the work is complete. Otherwise, 
domestic hot water and space heating should each have separate time controls.

5.25 If work is carried out on a system that includes a boiler, a boiler interlock should be installed.
5.26 If replacing a hot water cylinder, the replacement cylinder should have an electronic temperature 

control, such as a cylinder thermostat.

5.27 If replacing a boiler, the boiler controls should meet the standards in Section 6 for the relevant wet 

heating system. (The boiler controls are considered to be part of the boiler installation.)

38  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

L1(b), L2ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONL1(b), L2

Section 6: System specific guidance 

NOTE: This section sets out minimum Building Regulations standards for fixed building services and 
other systems. Best practice is to achieve higher efficiencies than these minimum standards.

NOTE: The Ecodesign for Energy-Related Products Regulations 2010 set the efficiencies and 
standards that must be met when introducing new energy-using products to the market. This 
approved document sets standards that should be met when installing fixed building services or 
on-site electricity generation. In cases where the Energy-Related Products Regulations and the 
Building Regulations both apply, both standards should be met.

Gas-fired heating systems
6.1  A gas-fired heating system should meet either of the following, in addition to the general 

requirements for heating and hot water systems in Section 5. 

a.  New dwellings should meet the minimum efficiencies in Table 6.1.

b.  Existing dwellings should meet the minimum efficiencies in Table 6.2.

NOTE: The minimum system efficiency in Table 6.1 might need to be improved upon to meet the 
target emission rate and target primary energy rate for the dwelling. 

Table 6.1 sets out minimum standards for services that are likely to be installed in new dwellings. If a 
service is not covered in Table 6.1 then it should meet either the efficiencies set out in Table 6.2 or an 
equivalent standard.

Table 6.1  Minimum efficiencies for gas-fired heating systems in new dwellings

System type

Minimum efficiency

Wet heating (e.g. radiators or underfloor heating)

92% (as defined in ErP(1))

NOTE:
1.  Energy-Related Products Directive. For Standard Assessment Procedure modelling, SEDBUK values should be used.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

39

ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONTable 6.2  Minimum efficiencies for gas-fired heating systems in existing dwellings

System type

Minimum efficiency

Notes

Wet heating (e.g. radiators or 
underfloor heating)

92% (as defined in ErP(1))

Or, in exceptional circumstances in 
existing dwellings(2), SEDBUK 2009 
efficiencies as follows:

• 78% for natural gas

• 80% for LPG

Follow paragraph 6.2

Range cooker with integral central 
heating boiler

75% (as defined in SEDBUK 2009)

Follow paragraph 6.3

Warm air heating

BS EN 17082

Independent space heating appliance 
for primary and secondary space 
heating 

63% gross

70% net

Inset live fuel-effect combined fire/
back boiler 

All types except inset live fuel-effect 
combined fire/back boiler

45% for natural gas

46% for LPG

63% for natural gas

64% for LPG

If a gas-fired circulator is 
incorporated for domestic hot water, 
its full and part load efficiency 
should meet BS EN 15502-2

Follow paragraph 6.4

Gross efficiency using the following 
standards as appropriate:

• BS EN 1266

• BS 7977-1

• BS EN 613

• BS EN 13278 

Follow paragraph 6.5

Gross efficiency using BS 7977-2

Follow paragraph 6.6

Gross efficiency using BS 7977-2 as 
appropriate

NOTES:
1.   Energy-Related Products Directive. For Standard Assessment Procedure modelling, SEDBUK values should be used.
2.   Exceptional circumstances are defined in the ODPM’s Guide to the Condensing Boiler Installation Assessment 

Procedure for Dwellings. 

6.2  If a gas-fired combination boiler is installed in an existing dwelling, at least one of the following 

energy efficiency measures, appropriate to the system, should be installed.

a.  Flue gas heat recovery.

b.  Weather compensation.

c.  Load compensation.

d.  Smart thermostat with automation and optimisation.

40  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

L1(b), L2ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSION6.3  A gas-fired range cooker with an integral central heating boiler (within a single appliance body) that 
is either part of a new system or is a replacement component in an existing system should have 
two independently controlled burners (one for the cooking function, and one for the boiler). 

NOTE: This paragraph does not apply to appliances with fully independent boiler and cooker parts 
within a shared case. In this case, the boiler should be treated as a conventional gas-fired boiler.

6.4  If a gas-fired warm air system is installed in an existing dwelling, all of the following should be met.

a.  The system should be installed in accordance with BS 5864.
b.  All new or replacement ductwork should be insulated in accordance with BS 5422.
c.  Where controls are external to the heater, the system should be provided with a time switch/

programmer and room thermostat, or programmable room thermostat. 

d.  Where controls are integrated in the heater, the system should be provided with a time switch/

programmer and room temperature sensor linked to heater firing and fan speed control.

e. 

Independent temperature control of the hot water circuit should be implemented with a 
cylinder thermostat and a timing device. When there is no demand for hot water both the pump 
and circulator should switch off.

6.5  A gas-fired fixed independent space heating appliance that is installed in an existing dwelling 

should meet the applicable standard(s) as follows.

a.  An appliance for primary space heating should meet standards (i) to (iv) below.

i.  BS EN 1266 
ii.  BS 7977-1
iii.  BS EN 613
iv.  BS EN 13278.

b.  An appliance for secondary space heating should meet one or more of standards (i) to (vi) below: 

i.  BS EN 1266 
ii.  BS 7977-1
iii.  BS EN 613
iv.  BS EN 13278
v.  BS EN 14829 
vi.  BS EN 449. 

6.6  If a gas fire is provided as a secondary heat source as part of a combined fire and back boiler unit in 

an existing system, the standards in BS 7977-2 should be met.  
If a gas-fired fixed decorative fuel-effect fire is installed in an existing dwelling, both of the 
following should be met.

6.7 

a.  The standards in BS EN 509 should be met.
b.  The number of appliances should not exceed one per 100m2 of dwelling floor area.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

41

L1(b), L2ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONOil-fired heating systems
6.8  An oil-fired heating system that is either part of a new system or is a replacement component in 
an existing dwelling should meet the minimum efficiencies in Table 6.3, in addition to the general 
requirements for heating and hot water systems in Section 5.

Table 6.3  Minimum efficiencies for oil-fired heating systems in existing dwellings

System type

Minimum efficiency

Notes

Wet heating – regular boiler

91% (as defined in ErP(1))

Wet heating – combi-boiler

86% (as defined in SEDBUK 2009)

Range cooker with integral central 
heating boiler

80%

Fixed independent space heating

60% (converted using Table E4 of the 
Standard Assessment Procedure)

Or, in exceptional circumstances(2) in 
existing dwellings, 84% SEDBUK 2009

Or, in exceptional circumstances(2) in 
existing dwellings, 82%

Follow paragraph 6.9

NOTES:
1.   Energy Related Products Directive. For Standard Assessment Procedure modelling, SEDBUK values should be used.
2.   Exceptional circumstances are defined in the ODPM’s Guide to the Condensing Boiler Installation Assessment 

Procedure for Dwellings. 

6.9  An oil-fired range cooker with an integral central heating boiler (within a single appliance body) 
that is either part of a new system or is a replacement component in an existing dwelling should 
have two independently controlled burners (one for the cooking function, and one for the boiler).  

NOTE: This paragraph does not apply to appliances with fully independent boiler and cooker parts 
within a shared case. In this case, the boiler should be treated as a conventional oil-fired boiler.

6.10  If a continuously burning oil-fired vaporising appliance is provided for secondary heating or hot 

water, one of the following should be met, depending on the type of appliance.

a.  For a manually operated appliance, no further control is required above the integral manual 

controls that the appliance manufacturer provided.

b.  For an electrically operated appliance, an integral remote or thermostatic control should be 

provided.

NOTE: This guidance does not apply to appliances that have been converted from another fuel.

Electric space heating systems

NOTE: Electric resistance heating is assumed to be 100% efficient, therefore no minimum efficiency 
is set for these types of system.

NOTE: This section of the guidance does not cover either of the following.
a.  Electric heat pumps (guidance is provided in paragraphs 6.36 to 6.43).

b.  Portable electric heating devices.

6.11  Electric heating systems should meet the guidance in paragraphs 6.12 to 6.14, in addition to the 

general requirements for heating and hot water systems in Section 5.

42  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

L1(b), L2ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSION6.12  For electric storage heaters, both of the following should be met. 

a.  Automatic control of input charge should be provided.

b.  The rate of heat release from the appliance should be adjustable, using an adjustable damper or 

other thermostatically controlled method.

6.13  For electric panel heaters that are either part of a new system or replacement components, time 
and temperature control should be provided to allow separate control for either of the following. 

a.  Each room.

b.  Each appliance, where this meets the guidance for thermostatic room controls in paragraphs 5.20  

to 5.22.

6.14  For an electric warm air system that is either a new system or is a replacement component, both of 

the following should be provided.

a.  A programmable room thermostat or a time switch and room thermostat. 

b.  Separately controllable heating zones that meet the guidance for thermostatic room controls in 

paragraphs 5.20 to 5.22.

Solid fuel heating systems
6.15  Solid fuel appliances in new and existing dwellings should have a minimum efficiency (gross 

calorific value) as given in Table 6.4 for the category of appliance.

6.16  A solid fuel appliance belonging to category D1/2/3/4, F, G2, J2 or J5 of Table 6.4 that is used to 

deliver primary heating as part of a central heating system should comply with all of the following.

a.  Meet the general requirements for heating and hot water systems in Section 5. 

b.  Have separate time controls for space heating and hot water circuits.

c.  Have automatic control of the burning rate.

d.  Follow the manufacturer’s instructions on the size and position of heat leak radiators designed 

to keep the system operating effectively by leaking heat.

6.17  A solid fuel appliance that is either part of a new central heating system or is a replacement 

component of a central heating system should meet both of the following. 

a.  The appliance should be from categories D, F, G or J in Table 6.4.

b.  The appliance should have a ratio of room heat to water heat appropriate for the room and the 

total property. 

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

43

L1(b), L2ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONCategory(1)

Appliance description

Minimum efficiency  
(gross calorific value)

D1/2/3/4

Open fire and high output boiler

E1/2/3

Dry room heater – wood or multi-
fuel

63%

65%

Feed type

Batch

Batch/auto

E4

F

G1

G2

J2

J5

Dry room heater – pellet stove

65% part load

Auto

70% nominal load

Room heater with boiler

67% (mineral fuels and wood logs)

Batch/auto

70% (wood pellets – part load)

75% (wood pellets – nominal load)

Cooker without boiler not exceeding 
3.5kW

55% (wood fuels)

Cooker with heating boiler exceeding 
3.5kW

60% (wood fuels)

Independent boiler – wood logs only

75%

Independent boiler – wood/pellets/
chips

75% nominal load

70% part load

Batch

Batch

Batch

Auto

NOTE:
1.   These categories are set out in HETAS’s The HETAS Guide to Approved Solid Fuel, Wood and Biomass Products  

and Services.

District heat networks and community heating systems
6.18  Paragraphs 6.19 to 6.25 apply when connecting dwellings to a district heat network or community 

heating system to which both of the following apply.

a.  Has a central heat source, such as a boiler, combined heat and power unit or heat pumps.

b.  Distributes heat to 15 or more dwellings. 

NOTE: An existing district heat network is defined in Appendix A. A new district heat network 
should be taken as meaning any other district heat network.

Connecting to a new district heat network or community heating system 
6.19  The central heat source should comply with the standards in Section 6 of Approved Document L, 

Volume 2: Buildings other than dwellings.

Connecting to an existing district heat network or community heating system
New dwellings 

6.20 An existing district heat network that is being connected to a new dwelling should not have a  
CO2 emission factor for delivered heat to the dwelling which is greater than 0.350kgCO2/kWh.  
The CO2 emission factor should be calculated using SAP 10 or taken from the Product 
Characteristics Database

NOTE: The same CO2 emission factors used to calculate the dwelling emission rate described 
in paragraph 2.9 of this approved document should be used to check against the minimum 
performance standards described in paragraph 6.20.

44  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

L1(b), L2Table 6.4   Solid fuel appliance categories and minimum efficienciesONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONExisting dwellings 

6.21  When connecting an existing dwelling to an existing district heat network or community heating 

system, the carbon intensity and primary energy of the system should be assessed and the guidance 
in paragraphs 5.4 and 5.5 should be followed. 

Emission factors and primary energy factors should be determined by a qualified person, based on 
the details of the system and taking account of the annual average performance of the whole system, 
including distribution circuits and all the heat generating plant, combined heat and power, waste heat 
recovery, heat dumping, and evidence of future changes to the heat source, for example, replacing or 
adding new heat generating equipment.

Minimising energy used by pumps
6.22 New district heat networks or community heating systems should meet both of the following.

a.  The design temperature difference for the community heating primary circuit should be a 

minimum of 20°C. Heat pump-led community heating systems may, however, need to run at a 
lower temperature difference.

b.  Variable volume control systems should be used to reduce the volume of water and the pressure 

difference required from the pumps under part load.

Controls
6.23 For wet heating systems, the maximum design flow rate into the dwelling’s heating system should 
be limited by suitable control and balancing valves to maintain the overall balance in the network 
and to avoid excessive pumping energy.

6.24 For new district heat networks or community heating systems, the domestic hot water system 
should have variable volume controls to maintain low return temperatures in the primary 
community heating circuit.

Metering
6.25 District heat networks and community heating systems should be designed to accommodate heat 

meter(s) for each dwelling.

Micro combined heat and power
6.26 The heating plant emission rate of the micro combined heat and power system (micro-CHP) should 
be no greater than the emission rate of a regular boiler using the same fuel as the micro-CHP. 

6.27 The heating plant emission rate should be calculated using all of the following.

a.  The method in DEFRA’s Method to Evaluate the Annual Energy Performance of Micro-

cogeneration Heating Systems in Dwellings.

b.  The performance data for the micro-CHP packaged according to BSI PAS 67.
c.  A plant size ratio that uses the nominal heat output of the heating plant divided by the average 

heat loss of the building when there is a temperature difference of 24.2°C.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

45

L1(b), L2ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONUnderfloor heating systems

Zoning and controls
6.28 New underfloor heating systems should meet all of the following, in addition to the general 

requirements for heating and hot water systems in Section 5.

a.  All underfloor heating systems should have controls to adjust the operating temperature. 

b.  Room thermostats for electric underfloor heating systems should have a manual override. 

c.  Heating systems for screed floors that are greater than 65mm thick should automatically reduce 

the room temperature at night or when the room is unoccupied.

d.  Heat loss should be minimised by following the guidance in paragraphs 6.29 to 6.32.

Minimising heat losses
6.29 Ground floors and those in contact with the outside of the dwelling should be insulated to limit 

heat losses to not more than 10W/m2. The heat loss from the floor should be calculated using the 
sum of the thermal resistance of the floor finish and the underlying heated layer, multiplied by 10.

6.30 Underfloor heating systems intended for intermittent or cyclical operation and/or installed over 
unheated rooms should be separated from the structural floor by a layer of insulation with a 
thermal resistance of at least 1.25(m2·K)/W.

6.31  The intermediate floor should have a layer of insulation to reduce downwards heat transmission 

with a thermal resistance of one of the following.

a.  The performance in paragraph 6.29.

b.  As specified in BS EN 1264-4, as follows.

i.  For electric systems, not less than 0.5(m2·K)/W. 

ii.  For wet systems, not less than 0.75(m2·K)/W.

6.32 Distribution pipework which does not provide useful heat to a room should be insulated to the 

standards detailed in paragraph 4.26.

Specific standards for electric underfloor heating
6.33 Electric cables for underfloor heating should be installed within screeds as follows.

a.  For direct electric systems, within screeds not exceeding 60mm.

b.  For night energy storage systems, within screeds of at least 65mm.

6.34 Where electric cable underfloor heating night energy storage systems are used, both of the 

following should be met.

a.  A minimum of 20% of the floor area of the dwelling should have fast-response systems, such as 

panel heaters.

b.  Controls should be installed which modify the input charge in response to both of the following.

i.  The room thermostat.

ii.  Floor temperature sensing.

46  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

L1(b), L2ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSION6.35 Programmable room thermostats with an override feature should be provided for all direct electric 
zones of the electric underfloor heating system. Thermostats should have air and floor temperature 
sensing capabilities which may be used individually or in combination.

Heat pump heating systems

NOTE: For heat pumps that provide comfort cooling, guidance is also given in paragraphs 6.49 to 6.53. 

6.36 Electrically driven air-to-air heat pumps with an output of 12kW or less should follow the 

Ecodesign Commission Regulation No. 2016/2281 for air heating products, cooling products, high 
temperature process chillers and fan coil units.

6.37 For other types of heat pump, not defined in paragraph 6.36, the coefficient of performance should 

be both of the following.

a.  For space heating, a minimum of 3.0. 

b.  For heating domestic hot water, a minimum of 2.0.

6.38 The heat pump unit should include controls for all of the following, in addition to meeting the 

general requirements for heating and hot water systems in Section 5.

a.  To control water pump operation (internal and external, as appropriate).

b.  To control either of the following.

i.  For wet systems, water temperature.

ii.  For air systems, air temperature.

c.  For air-to-water and air-to-air units, to control outdoor fan operation.

d.  For air-to-water and air-to-air systems, to provide a defrost control for the external air-side heat 

exchanger.

e.  For air-to-air systems, to control secondary heating (if fitted).

f.  To protect against water flow failure.

g.  To protect against high water temperature.

h.  To protect against high refrigerant pressure.

i.  For air-to-water and air-to-air units, to protect against air flow failure.

6.39 The heat pump should have external controls that include both of the following. 

a.  Weather compensation or internal temperature control.

b.  Timer or programmer for space heating.

6.40 For heat pump installations in which there are other heat sources available to the same building, 
each of these heat sources should be appropriately incorporated into a singular control system. 

6.41  Heat pumps should be located and installed subject to the manufacturer’s guidance. In regard 

to air source heat pumps, this includes the consideration of factors that may adversely affect their 
performance, e.g. the avoidance of cold exhaust air recirculation and the removal of condensation 
from the outdoor coil during a defrost cycle. 

6.42 Heat pumps should not be sited adjacent to sleeping areas, nor should they be located on 

materials that can readily transmit vibrations. Additionally, the location of external fans and heat 
pump compressors should be appropriately selected to minimise disturbance to neighbours, while 
remaining in compliance with planning requirements. 

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

47

L1(b), L2ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSION6.43  The installation of anti-vibration instruments and flexible hose connections should be in accordance 

with the manufacturer’s guidance in order to limit the effects of harmful vibrations on building structures. 

Solar water heating systems

NOTE: The guidance for solar water heating in this document applies to indirect solar systems that 
supply domestic hot water and have both of the following.

a.  A solar collector area of less than 20m2.

b.  A solar heated water storage volume of less than 440 litres.

6.44 New solar hot water collectors should be independently certified as complying with all tests 

required by BS EN 12975-1 and BS EN ISO 9806 for both of the following.
a.  Thermal performance.

b.  Reporting and identification.

6.45 The electrical input power of the primary pump in the solar water heating system measured in 

watts should be less than the higher of the following.

a.  50W.

b.  2% of the peak thermal power of the collector.

6.46 For a heat exchanger between a solar primary and secondary system, a minimum of 0.1m2 or 

equivalent of heat exchanger area should be provided for every 1m2 of the net absorber area of the 

solar collector. 

6.47 For work on new or existing solar water heating systems, controls should be fitted to or upgraded 

in solar domestic hot water systems to do all of the following.

a.  Maximise the useful energy gain from the solar collectors.

b.  Minimise the accidental loss of stored energy.

c.  Ensure that hot water produced by back-up sources is not used when adequate solar pre-heated 

water is available.

d.  Provide a means to control the adverse effects of excessive temperatures and pressures.

e.  Where a separate domestic hot water heating appliance is pre-heated by a solar system, the 

appliance should be controlled to add no extra heat if the target temperature is met from the 
solar pre-heated vessel.

6.48 The dedicated storage volume of solar heated water relative to the area of the collector should be 

either of the following.

a.  A minimum volume of 25 litres for every 1m2 of the net absorber area of the solar collector.

b.  A volume equivalent to at least 80% of the daily hot water demand (as defined by the Standard 

Assessment Procedure).

48  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

L1(b), L2ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONComfort cooling
6.49 The specification of comfort cooling systems should be based on a heat gain calculation for the 
dwelling. To calculate heat gain, both CIBSE’s Guide A and the manufacturer’s guidance should 
be followed. Systems should not be significantly oversized – in most circumstances, the cooling 
appliance should not be sized for more than 120% of the design cooling load.

6.50 The seasonal energy efficiency ratio of an air conditioner working in cooling mode should be a 

minimum of 4.0. 

6.51  Comfort cooling systems should have both of the following controls. 

a.  For each control zone and for each terminal unit, independent control of both of the following 

should be possible.

i.  Timing. 

ii.  Temperature.

b. 

If both heating and cooling are provided in the same space, the controls should prevent them 
from operating simultaneously. 

6.52 For cooling systems that serve multiple dwellings, follow the guidance in Approved Document L, 

Volume 2: Buildings other than dwellings.

6.53 Exposed refrigeration pipework should be both of the following. 

a. 

Insulated.

b.  Enclosed in protective trunking.

Mechanical ventilation
6.54 Ventilation systems should meet the ventilation needs of the dwelling, in accordance with 

Approved Document F, Volume 1: Dwellings. Systems should be designed so that they can be 
commissioned to suitable ventilation rates so that spaces are not significantly overventilated.

6.55 The specific fan power for mechanical ventilation systems should not exceed the following.

a.  For intermittent extract ventilation systems: 0.5W/(l·s).

b.  For continuous mechanical extract ventilation systems: 0.7W/(l·s).

c.  For continuous supply ventilation systems: 0.5W/(l·s).

d.  For continuous mechanical supply and extract ventilation systems: 1.5W/(l·s).

6.56 All ventilation systems which provide both supply and extract ventilation within the same unit 

should be fitted with all of the following.

a.  A heat recovery system with a minimum efficiency of 73%.

b.  A summer bypass facility (giving the ability to bypass the heat exchanger or to control its heat 

recovery performance).

c.  A variable speed controller.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

49

L1(b), L2ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONLighting
6.57 Any fixed lighting should achieve lighting levels appropriate to the activity in the space and spaces 

should not be over-illuminated.  

NOTE: In many cases, it is likely that householders will be able to choose the lamp installed in the 
individual space.

6.58 Where installed in a new or existing dwelling, each internal light fitting should have lamps with a 

minimum luminous efficacy of 75 light source lumens per circuit-watt. 

6.59 Where installed in a new or existing dwelling, internal light fittings should have local controls to 

allow for the separate control of lighting in each space or zone. Controls may be manual, automatic 
or a combination of both.

6.60 Where installed in a new or existing dwelling, fixed external lighting should have both of the 

following controls.

a.  Automatic controls which switch luminaires off in response to daylight. 

b. 

If luminous efficacy is 75 light source lumens per circuit-watt or less, automatic controls which 
switch luminaires off after the area lit becomes unoccupied. If luminous efficacy is greater than 
75 light source lumens per circuit-watt, manual control is acceptable. 

Building automation and control systems
6.61  Where a building automation and control system is installed, it should have appropriate control 

capabilities for the dwelling, based on the type of building, its expected use and potential energy 
savings. 

6.62 The system should be specified and installed according to the manufacturer’s instructions to ensure 

that its overall performance meets a reasonable standard. 

6.63 For large or complex buildings, the guidance in Approved Document L, Volume 2: Buildings other 

than dwellings should be followed.

On-site electricity generation and storage
6.64 Where on-site electricity generation and storage is installed, such as photovoltaic panels or battery 
storage, systems should be an appropriate size for the site, available infrastructure and on-site 
energy demand.  

6.65 The system should be specified and installed according to the manufacturer’s instructions to ensure 

that the overall performance of the system meets a reasonable standard.  

6.66 When replacing an existing system, the installed generation capacity of the new system should be 
no less than that of the existing system, except where a smaller system can be demonstrated to be 
more appropriate or effective (e.g. replacing an existing system with one which is better matched 
to the dwelling’s energy demand).

6.67 On-site electricity generation should be provided with controls to allow proper operation of 

the system without the need for user intervention. This is particularly the case where electricity 
generation and storage systems are used, such as batteries.

50  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

L1(b), L2ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONRegulation 43: Pressure testing

This section deals with the requirements of regulation 43 of the Building Regulations 2010.

Regulation

Pressure testing
43. 

(1)   This regulation applies to the erection of a building in relation to which paragraph L1(a)(i) of Schedule 1 

imposes a requirement. 

(2)   Where this regulation applies, the person carrying out the work shall, for the purpose of ensuring compliance 

with regulation 26 and regulation 26A and paragraph L1(a)(i) of Schedule 1— 

(a)  ensure that— 

(i)   pressure testing is carried out in such circumstances as are approved by the Secretary of State; and 

(ii)   the testing is carried out in accordance with a procedure approved by the Secretary of State; and 

(b)   subject to paragraph (5), give notice of the results of the testing to the local authority. 

(3)   The notice referred to in paragraph (2)(b) shall— 

(a)   record the results and the data upon which they are based in a manner approved by the Secretary of 

State; and 

(b)   be given to the local authority not later than seven days after the final test is carried out. 

(4)   A local authority are authorised to accept, as evidence that the requirements of paragraph (2)(a)(ii) have  

been satisfied, a certificate to that effect by a person who is registered by Elmhurst Energy Systems Limited 
or the Air Tightness Testing and Measurement Association in respect of pressure testing for the air tightness  
of buildings.

(5)   Where such a certificate contains the information required by paragraph (3)(a), paragraph (2)(b) does not 

apply.

NOTE: Where the building control body is an approved inspector, see regulation 20 of the Building 
(Approved Inspectors etc.) Regulations 2010 (as amended).

Intention

In the Secretary of State’s view, the requirements of regulation 43 are met, when a dwelling is erected, 
by carrying out pressure testing in accordance with paragraphs 7.2 to 7.4 and 7.6 to 7.8.

In the Secretary of State’s view, results from a pressure test must be used to show that work complies 
with both of the following.

a.  Regulations 26 and 26A of the Building Regulations, in accordance with paragraphs 7.5 to 7.7.

b.  The requirements of Part L1(a)(i) of Schedule 1 to the Building Regulations, in accordance with 

paragraphs 7.1 and 7.5. 

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

51

R43ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 7: Air permeability and pressure 
testing

7.1  The minimum standard for air permeability of a new dwelling is given in Table 4.1 of Section 4.
7.2  The building control body should be provided with evidence that test equipment has been 

calibrated using a UKAS-accredited facility or by the original manufacturer within either of the 
following periods.

a.  The previous 12 months.

b.  A period in accordance with manufacturer’s guidance. 

Calibration should be carried out in accordance with CIBSE’s TM23. It is recommended that test 
equipment is recalibrated at least every 24 months.

7.3  Building control bodies may accept a pressure test certificate as evidence that the dwelling 

complies with regulation 43 of the Building Regulations. 

The building control body should be provided with evidence that the person who pressure-tested 
the building meets both of the following.

a.  Has received appropriate training.

b. 

Is registered to test the specific class of building.

7.4  An air pressure test should be carried out on every dwelling.

Showing compliance and reporting pressure test results
7.5  The dwelling primary energy rate, dwelling emission rate and dwelling fabric energy efficiency 

rate, all calculated using the measured air permeability, must not be higher than the target primary 
energy rate, target emission rate and target fabric energy efficiency rate, respectively.

7.6 

If the criteria in paragraphs 7.1 and 7.5 are not achieved, the dwelling air permeability should be 
improved. New tests should be carried out until the dwelling achieves the criteria in paragraphs 7.1 
and 7.5. 

7.7  The results of all pressure tests on dwellings, including any test failures, should be reported to the 

building control body.

Air pressure testing procedure
7.8  Air pressure tests should be performed following the guidance in the approved airtightness 

testing methodology, CIBSE’s TM23. The procedures in that document have been approved by the 
Secretary of State.

52  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R43ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONRegulations 44 and 44ZA and requirements 
L1(b)(iii) and L2(b): Commissioning

This section deals with the requirements of regulations 44 and 44ZA and Part L1(b)(iii) and L2(b) of 
Schedule 1 to the Building Regulations 2010.

Regulation

Commissioning

44. 

(1)   This regulation applies to building work in relation to which paragraph F1(2) of Schedule 1 imposes 

a requirement, but does not apply to the provision or extension of any fixed system for mechanical 
ventilation or any associated controls where testing and adjustment is not possible. 

(2)   This regulation applies to building work in relation to which paragraph L1(b) of Schedule 1 imposes 

a requirement, but does not apply to the provision or extension of any fixed building service where 
testing and adjustment is not possible or would not affect the energy efficiency of that fixed building 
service.

(3)   Where this regulation applies the person carrying out the work shall, for the purpose of ensuring 

compliance with paragraph F1(2) or L1(b) of Schedule 1, give to the local authority a notice confirming 
that the fixed building services have been commissioned in accordance with a procedure approved by 
the Secretary of State.

(4)   The notice shall be given to the local authority—

(a)  not later than the date on which the notice required by regulation 16(4) is required to be given; or

(b)  where that regulation does not apply, not more than 30 days after completion of the work.

Commissioning in respect of a system for on-site electricity generation  

44ZA. 

(1)   This regulation applies to building work in respect of a building in relation to which paragraph L2 of 

Schedule 1 imposes a requirement, but does not apply to the provision or extension of any system for 
on-site electricity generation where testing and adjustment is not possible.

(2)   Where this regulation applies the person carrying out the work must, for the purpose of ensuring 

compliance with paragraph L2 of Schedule 1, give to the local authority a notice confirming that the 
system for on-site electricity generation has been commissioned.

(3)  The notice must be given to the local authority—

(a)  not later than the date on which the notice required by regulation 16(4) is required to be given; or

(b)  where that regulation does not apply, not more than 30 days after completion of the work.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

53

R44, R44ZA, L1(b), L2(b)ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Limits on application

Requirement

Requirement

Schedule 1 – Part L Conservation of fuel and power

L1. 

 Reasonable provision shall be made for the  
conservation of fuel and power in buildings by— 

  (a)  limiting heat gains and losses—

(i)   through thermal elements and other parts of 

the building fabric; and

(ii)   from pipes, ducts and vessels used for 

space heating, space cooling and hot water 
services; 

(b)  providing fixed building services which—

(i)  are energy efficient to a reasonable standard;

(ii)  have effective controls; and

(iii)  are commissioned by testing and adjusting 
as necessary to ensure they use no more 
fuel and power than is reasonable in the 
circumstances.

L2. 

 Where a system for on-site electricity generation is 
installed—

(a)   reasonable provision must be made to ensure 

that—

(i)   the system and its electrical output are 

appropriately sized for the site and available 
infrastructure;

(ii)  the system has effective controls; and

(b)  it must be commissioned by testing and 
adjusting as necessary to ensure that it 
produces the maximum electricity that is 
reasonable in the circumstances.

NOTE: Where the building control body is an approved inspector, see regulation 20 of the Building 
(Approved Inspectors etc.) Regulations 2010 (as amended).

Intention

In the Secretary of State’s view, requirements L1(b)(iii) and L2(b) and the requirements of regulations 
44 and 44ZA are met by commissioning fixed building services and on-site electricity generation in 
accordance with Section 8. 

54  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R44, R44ZA, L1(b), L2(b)ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSION 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 8: Commissioning

8.1  Fixed building services must be commissioned to ensure that they use no more fuel and power than 
is reasonable in the circumstances. On-site electricity generation systems must be commissioned 
to ensure that they produce as much electricity as is reasonable in the circumstances. The 
commissioning process should involve testing and adjusting the fixed building services and on-site 
electricity generation as necessary and in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

8.2  A commissioning plan should be produced, identifying both of the following.

a.  Systems that need to be tested.

b.  How these systems will be tested.

For new dwellings, the commissioning plan should be given to the building control body with 
the design stage dwelling primary energy rate, dwelling emission rate and dwelling fabric energy 
efficiency rate calculations. 

8.3  A fixed building service or on-site electricity generation that, by design, cannot be adjusted, or for 

which commissioning would not affect energy use, does not need to be commissioned.

The commissioning plan should identify the fixed building services and on-site electricity generation 
that do not need to be commissioned, and why they do not need to be commissioned.

Notice of completion 
8.4  A commissioning notice must be given to the relevant building control body confirming that 

commissioning has been carried out for the installed fixed building services and on-site electricity 
generation according to the procedures in this section. The notice should confirm all of the 
following. 

a.  That the commissioning plan has been followed.

b.  That all systems have been inspected in an appropriate sequence and to a reasonable standard.

c.  That test results confirm that performance is reasonably in accordance with the design requirements. 

8.5  The notice of completion of commissioning should be given as follows.

a. 

b. 

c. 

If a building notice or full plans have been given to a local authority building control body, the 
notice should be given within five days of the commissioning work being completed. 

If the building control body is an approved inspector, the notice should generally be given to the 
approved inspector within five days of the work being completed. 

In other cases – for example, if the work is carried out by a person registered with a competent 
person scheme – the notice must be given to the building control body within 30 days of the 
work being completed. 

8.6  Where fixed building services and on-site electricity generation that require commissioning are 

installed by a person registered with a competent person scheme, that person may give the notice 
of completion of commissioning.

8.7  Until the building control body receives the notice of completion of commissioning, it may decide 

not to give a completion/final certificate. 

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

55

R44, R44ZA, L1(b), L2(b)ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONSystem specific guidance for commissioning

Hot water systems for space and domestic hot water heating
8.8  Before a new heating appliance is installed, all central heating and primary hot water circuits should 
be thoroughly cleaned and flushed out. A suitable chemical inhibitor should be added to the 
primary heating circuit to protect against scale and corrosion. In hard water areas, suitable measures 
should be taken to treat the feed water to water heaters and the hot water circuit of combination 
boilers to reduce limescale accumulation. Domestic central heating systems should be prepared and 
commissioned to BS 7593.
NOTE: The Benchmark Commissioning Checklist can be used to show that commissioning has been 
carried out satisfactorily for the heating and hot water system and its heat generation source.

Heat pump heating systems
8.9  Heat pumps and any dedicated ancillary products, e.g. integrated hot water cylinders, should be 

commissioned in accordance with both the manufacturer’s instructions and the appropriate system 
design parameters. 

8.10  If using a ground source heat pump the commissioning procedure for the ground array should be  

as follows. 

a.  Ground arrays – including header pipes and manifolds – should be flushed as one system to 
remove all debris and purged to remove all air. Vertical, horizontal and slinky ground arrays in 
particular should be flushed in both directions. During this process, the heat pump (along with 
its accompanying pipework) should be isolated from the ground heat exchanger such that 
damage to the internal heat exchanger inside the heat pump is avoided. 

b.  The heat pump – along with its accompanying pipework – should be flushed and purged as a 

separate system while isolated from the ground array system. 

c.  Following the complete purging of micro air bubbles, a pressure test (in accordance with  

BS EN 805, section 11.3.3.4) should be conducted on all closed-loop ground source heat pump  
installations to prove the integrity of the systems. This test should be conducted on the entire 
system, which typically comprises the heat pump, header pipes, manifold and all ground arrays.

d.  Antifreeze and biocide should be added to ground heat exchangers as appropriate, in line with 

manufacturer’s instructions.   

8.11  Commissioning information provided to the dwelling owner should include details of the fluids 

used and their comissioned concentrations.

Community heating systems
8.12  For district heat networks and community heating systems, both of the following should be done.

a.  Systems should be commissioned to optimise the use of energy for pumping.

b.  Flow rates in individual heat emitters should be balanced using either of the following. 

i.  Appropriate return temperatures.

ii.  Calibrated control valves.

Underfloor heating
8.13  All installed equipment in underfloor heating systems should be commissioned in accordance with 

BS EN 1264-4.

56  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R44, R44ZA, L1(b), L2(b)ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONRegulations 40 and 40A: Providing 
information

This section deals with the requirements of regulations 40 and 40A of the Building Regulations 2010.

Regulations

Information about use of fuel and power 

40.   

(1)   This regulation applies where paragraph L1 of Schedule 1 imposes a requirement in relation to building 

work. 

(2)   The person carrying out the work shall not later than five days after the work has been completed provide 
to the owner sufficient information about the building, the fixed building services and their maintenance 
requirements so that the building can be operated in such a manner as to use no more fuel and power 
than is reasonable in the circumstances.

Information about systems for on-site generation of electricity

40A. 

(1)   This regulation applies to building work in respect of a building in relation to which paragraph L2 of 

Schedule 1 applies.

(2)   The person carrying out the work must, not later than five days after the work has been completed, 

provide to the owner sufficient information about the system for on-site electricity generation in respect 
of its operation and maintenance requirements so that the system may be operated and maintained in 
such a manner as to produce the maximum electricity that is reasonable in the circumstances and delivers 
this electricity to the optimal place for use.

Intention

In the Secretary of State’s view, when a new building is erected, the requirements of regulations 40 
and 40A are met by providing the owner with information about all of the following. 

a.  Operating and maintenance instructions for fixed building services and on-site electricity 

generation, in accordance with paragraphs 9.1 and 9.2. 

b.  Other important documentation, as given in paragraphs 9.3 to 9.5.

In the Secretary of State’s view, the requirements of regulations 40 and 40A are met when work is 
carried out on an existing dwelling by providing the owner with both of the following. 

a.  Operating and maintenance instructions for the work on fixed building services and on-site 
electricity generation that has been carried out, in accordance with paragraphs 9.1 and 9.2. 

b.  Relevant information for work on existing systems, as detailed in paragraphs 9.6 to 9.9. 

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

57

R40, R40AONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSION 
  
 
  
Section 9: Providing information

Operating and maintenance instructions
9.1  For a new dwelling and for work to an existing dwelling, operating and maintenance instructions 

should be given to the owners of the dwelling for any fixed building services and on-site electricity 
generation installed as part of the work. 

The instructions should contain sufficient information to help the occupiers achieve the expected 
level of energy efficiency and to verify that any fixed building services and on-site electricity 
generation comply with the energy performance requirements of the Building Regulations. The 
documentation should be all of the following.

a.  Easy to understand. 

b.  Specific to the dwelling.

c.  Durable.

d.  In an accessible format.

9.2  For a new dwelling and for work to an existing dwelling, the operating and maintenance 

instructions should do all of the following.

a.  Explain the following for the fixed building services and on-site electricity generation and any 

other technologies.

i.  What they are.

ii.  What they are for.

iii.  Where they are located, using a floor plan.

iv.  How to operate them, including the location and operation of timers and sensors.

v.  How to maintain them.

b.  Signpost other important documentation, such as appliance manuals.

c. 

Include a completed commissioning sheet, where relevant. 

Additional information for new dwellings 
9.3  For new dwellings, a signed copy of the Building Regulations England Part L compliance report 
(BREL report) and photographic evidence of the build quality should be provided to the 
homeowner.

9.4  For new dwellings, the operating and maintenance instructions should signpost both of the 

following. 

a.  The as-built BREL report, which includes data used to calculate dwelling primary energy rate, 

dwelling emission rate and dwelling fabric energy efficiency rate. 

b.  The recommendations report generated with the ‘on-construction’ energy performance 

certificate. 

58  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R40, R40AONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSION9.5  For new dwellings, the operating and maintenance instructions should include a Home User  
Guide. The Home User Guide should contain non-technical advice on how to operate and  
maintain the dwelling in a healthy and energy efficient manner. The guide should contain advice  
on the following.

a.  Ventilation.

b.  Heating and domestic hot water.

c.  On-site electricity generation (if applicable).

d.  Staying cool in hot weather.  

A template for a Home User Guide can be viewed at https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/
home-user-guide-template. 

There is no requirement to follow the layout, format or example text used in the template. 

Additional information for work in existing buildings 
9.6  For existing dwellings, when any building work is carried out for which Section 5 and/or Section 6 
of this approved document sets a standard, the energy performance of the fixed building services 
and/or on-site electricity generation affected by the work should be assessed and documented.

9.7  For existing dwellings, when installing a complete new or replacement system (e.g. replacing 
a heating system including the heating appliance, pipework and heat emitters), the energy 
performance of the whole system should be assessed. The results should be recorded and given to 
the building owner with the manufacturer’s supporting literature. The record of energy performance 
results may be in any of the following forms.

a.  Full records of commissioning the system in accordance with Section 8.

b.  A documented assessment using the Standard Assessment Procedure, such as a new energy 

performance certificate.

c.  Another equivalent assessment carried out by a suitably qualified person.

9.8  For existing dwellings, when carrying out work on an existing system, such as installing or replacing 
components (e.g. replacing a boiler but retaining the pipework and heat emitters), the energy 
performance of the new components should be assessed. The results should be recorded and  
given to the building owner. The record of energy performance results may be in either of the 
following forms.

a.  Product data sheets from the product manufacturer.

b.  Other documented results of energy assessment of the product carried out in accordance with 

relevant test standards.

9.9  For existing dwellings, if work on an existing system alters the energy performance or CO2 

emissions performance of the system, then the complete altered system should be assessed and 
the guidance for new or replacement systems in paragraph 9.7 should be followed. Such work could 
include the following. 

a.  A change in heating fuel for a space heating or domestic hot water system. 

b.  Extending or expanding the capacity of a space heating, comfort cooling or ventilation system 

by over 25% of its previous capacity.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

59

R40, R40AONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONRegulation 23(2) and requirement L1(a): 
Replacement of thermal elements and limiting 
heat gains and losses

This section deals with the requirements of regulation 23(2) and Part L1(a) of Schedule 1 to the Building 
Regulations 2010.

Regulation

Requirements for the renovation or replacement of thermal elements

23.   (2)   Where the whole or any part of an individual thermal element is proposed to be replaced and the 

replacement—

(a)  constitutes a major renovation; or

(b)   (in the case of part replacement) amounts to the replacement of more than 50% of the thermal 

element’s surface area;

 the whole of the thermal element must be replaced so as to ensure that it complies with paragraph L1(a)(i) 
of Schedule 1, in so far as that is technically, functionally and economically feasible.

Limits on application

Requirement

Requirement

Schedule 1 – Part L Conservation of fuel and power

L1. 

 Reasonable provision shall be made for the 
conservation of fuel and power in buildings by: 

  (a)  limiting heat gains and losses—

(i)   through thermal elements and other parts 

of the building fabric; and

(ii)  from pipes, ducts and vessels used for 

space heating, space cooling and hot water 
services; 

  (b)  providing fixed building services which—

(i)  are energy efficient to a reasonable standard;

(ii)  have effective controls; and

(iii)  are commissioned by testing and adjusting 
as necessary to ensure they use no more 
fuel and power than is reasonable in the 
circumstances.

Intention

In the Secretary of State’s view, the requirements of regulation 23(2) and requirement L1(a) are met for 
new or replacement elements in existing dwellings by following the standards in Section 10.

60  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R23(2), L1(a)ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSION 
   
 
   
 
   
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
Section 10: New elements in existing 
dwellings, including extensions

General 
10.1  This section provides guidance for new elements in existing dwellings, including all the following 

types of work. 

a.  Providing a new thermal element in an existing dwelling – follow paragraph 10.1.

b.  Providing a replacement thermal element in an existing dwelling – follow paragraph 10.2.

c.  Replacing windows, doors or rooflights (controlled fittings) in an existing dwelling – follow 

paragraphs 10.3 to 10.6.

d.  Extending an existing dwelling – follow paragraphs 10.7 to 10.11.

e.  Adding a conservatory or porch to an existing dwelling – follow paragraphs 10.12 and 10.13.

NOTE: Guidance for renovating elements in existing dwellings is given in Section 11. 

New and replacement fabric elements
10.2  The minimum standards in paragraphs 4.7 and 4.8 and Table 4.2 should be met for both of the 

following. 

a.  New thermal elements installed in an existing dwelling. 

b.  Thermal elements constructed to replace existing thermal elements.

10.3  For new and replacement windows, roof windows, rooflights and doors (controlled fittings), if the 

entire unit of that fitting is provided, all the following apply.

a.  Units should be draught-proofed.

b.  Units should meet the minimum standards given in Table 4.2.

c. 

Insulated cavity closers should be installed where appropriate.

10.4  Building control bodies may accept, as evidence of compliance with the standards given in Table 
4.2, a Window Energy Rating and/or Doorset Energy Rating from a certification scheme that 
provides a quality assured process and supporting audit trail from calculating the performance of 
the window through to the window being installed.

10.5  If a window is enlarged or a new one is created, either of the following should be met.

a.  The area of windows, roof windows, rooflights and doors should not exceed 25% of the total 

floor area of the dwelling.

b. 

If the area of windows, roof windows, rooflights and doors exceeds 25% of the total floor area 
of the dwelling, compensating measures should be taken to improve the energy efficiency of the 
dwelling. 

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

61

R23(2), L1(a)ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSION10.6  The term controlled fitting refers to the entire unit of a window, roof window, rooflight or door, 
including the frame. Replacing glazing, or a window or door in its existing frame is not providing a 
controlled fitting. Such work does not need to meet the energy efficiency requirements.

Extension of a dwelling
10.7  When a dwelling is extended, elements should satisfy all of the following.

a.  New thermal elements should meet the standards in Table 4.2 and paragraph 4.7. 

b.  Replacement thermal elements should meet the standards in Table 4.2 and paragraph 4.8.

c.  New windows, roof windows, rooflights and doors should meet the standards in Table 4.2. 

d.  The total area of windows, roof windows, rooflights and doors in extensions should not exceed 

the sum of the following. 

i.  25% of the floor area of the extension.

ii.  The total area of any windows and doors which no longer exist or are no longer exposed 

due to the extension.

e.  Existing fabric elements that will become thermal elements should meet the limiting standards 

in Table 4.3 by following the guidance in paragraphs 11.2 to 11.4.  

10.8  When a dwelling is extended, any fixed building services or on-site electricity generation that are 

provided or extended should comply with the guidance in Sections 5 and 6.

10.9  As an alternative approach to paragraph 10.7, the area-weighted U-value of all thermal elements in 
the extension should be shown to not exceed the area-weighted U-value of an extension of the 
same size and shape that complies with paragraph 10.7.

The area-weighted U-value is given by the following expression.

[(U1 × A1) + (U2 × A2) + (U3 × A3) + …]
(A1 + A2 + A3 + …)

Where:

U1 = the U-value of element type 1
A1 = the area of element type 1
and so on. 

10.10 As an alternative approach to paragraphs 10.7 or 10.9, the Standard Assessment Procedure may be 
used to show that the dwelling primary energy rate, the dwelling emission rate and the dwelling 
fabric energy efficiency rate for the dwelling and proposed extension do not exceed those for the 
dwelling plus a notional extension. The notional extension should be the same size and shape as 
the proposed extension and comply with paragraph 10.7. The openings in the notional extension 
should conform with paragraph 10.7d, with the door area set as equal to the door area of the 
proposed extension and the remainder of the openings being classified as windows. 

NOTE: Where the performance of elements of the existing dwelling is unknown, data in the 
Standard Assessment Procedure Appendix S should be used to estimate the performance.

62  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R23(2), L1(a)ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSION10.11  When extending an existing dwelling with a total useful floor area of over 1000m2, consequential 

improvements may be required. Guidance in Section 12 should be followed. 

Conservatories and porches
10.12 A conservatory or porch must have thermal separation from the existing dwelling. If the thermal 

separation is removed or the dwelling’s heating system is extended into the conservatory or porch, 
the conservatory or porch should be treated as an extension and paragraphs 10.7 to 10.11 should be 
followed.

10.13 If the conservatory or porch is not exempt from the energy efficiency requirements (see paragraph 
0.14), all the following elements should meet the minimum standards of paragraphs 4.7 and 4.8 and 
Table 4.2.

a.  New thermal elements.

b.  Replacement thermal elements.

c.  New windows, roof windows, rooflights and doors. The limitations on area of windows, doors 

and rooflights in paragraph 10.7d do not apply. 

In addition, both of the following should apply. 

a.  Any walls, doors and windows should be insulated and draught-proofed to at least the same 

extent as in the existing dwelling. 

b.  Fixed building services and/or on-site electricity generation within the conservatory or porch 

should both:

i.  meet the standards in Sections 5 and 6

ii.  have independent temperature and on/off controls. 

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

63

R23(2), L1(a)ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONRegulation 23(1) and requirement L1(a): 
Renovating elements in existing dwellings and 
limiting heat gains and losses

This section deals with the requirements of regulation 23(1) and Part L1(a) of Schedule 1 to the Building 
Regulations 2010.

Regulation

Requirements for the renovation or replacement of thermal elements

23.   (1)   Where the renovation of an individual thermal element—

(a)   constitutes a major renovation; or

(b)   amounts to the renovation of more than 50% of the element’s surface area;

 the renovation must be carried out so as to ensure that the whole of the element complies with paragraph 
L1(a)(i) of Schedule 1, in so far as that is technically, functionally and economically feasible.

Limits on application

Requirement

Requirement

Schedule 1 – Part L Conservation of fuel and power

L1. 

 Reasonable provision shall be made for the 
conservation of fuel and power in buildings by: 

  (a)  limiting heat gains and losses—

(i)   through thermal elements and other parts 

of the building fabric; and

(ii)   from pipes, ducts and vessels used for 

space heating, space cooling and hot water 
services; 

  (b)  providing fixed building services which—

(i)  are energy efficient to a reasonable standard;

(ii)  have effective controls; and

(iii)  are commissioned by testing and adjusting 
as necessary to ensure they use no more 
fuel and power than is reasonable in the 
circumstances.

Intention

In the Secretary of State’s view, the requirements of regulation 23(1) and requirement L1(a) are met for 
work to elements in existing dwellings by renovating a thermal element to the standards in Section 11.

64  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R23(1), L1(a)ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSION 
   
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
Regulations 6 and 22: Material change of use 
and change to energy status

This section deals with the requirements of regulations 6 and 22 of the Building Regulations 2010.

Regulation

Requirements relating to material change of use

6.    (1)   Where there is a material change of use of the whole of a building, such work, if any, shall be carried out 

as is necessary to ensure that the building complies with the applicable requirements of the following 
paragraphs of Schedule 1—

(a)   in all cases, B1 (means of warning and escape) 

B2 (internal fire spread—linings) 
B3 (internal fire spread—structure) 
B4(2) (external fire spread—roofs) 
B5 (access and facilities for the fire service) 
C2(c) (interstitial and surface condensation) 
F1 (ventilation) 
G1 (cold water supply) 
G3(1) to (3) (hot water supply and systems) 
G4 (sanitary conveniences and washing facilities) 
G5 (bathrooms) 
G6 (kitchens and food preparation areas) 
H1 (foul water drainage) 
H6 (solid waste storage) 
J1 to J4 (combustion appliances) 
L1 (conservation of fuel and power) 
P1 (electrical safety); 
S2 (infrastructure for the charging of electric vehicles);

(b)  in the case of a material change of use described in regulation 5(c), (d), (e) or (f), A1 to A3 (structure);

(c)  in the case of a building exceeding fifteen metres in height, B4(1) (external fire spread—walls);

(d)   in the case of a material change of use described in regulation 5(a), (b), (c), (d), (g), (h), (i) or, where the 
material change provides new residential accommodation, (f), C1(2) (resistance to contaminants);

(e)  in the case of a material change of use described in regulation 5(a), C2 (resistance to moisture);

(f)   in the case of a material change of use described in regulation 5(a), (b), (c), (g), (h) or (i), E1 to E3 

(resistance to the passage of sound);

(g)   in the case of a material change of use described in regulation 5(e), where the public building consists of 

or contains a school, E4 (acoustic conditions in schools);

(h)   in the case of a material change of use described in regulation 5(a) or (b), G2 (water efficiency) and G3(4) 

(hot water supply and systems: hot water supply to fixed baths);

(i)   in the case of a material change of use described in regulation 5(c), (d), (e) or (j), M1 (access to and use of 

buildings other than dwellings);

(j)  in the case of a material change of use described in regulation 5(a), (b) or (g), Q1 (security).

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

65

R6, R22ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSION 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
Regulation continued

  (2)   Where there is a material change of use of part only of a building, such work, if any, shall be carried out as 

is necessary to ensure that—

(a)   that part complies in all cases with any applicable requirements referred to in paragraph (1)(a);

(b)   in a case in which sub-paragraphs (b), (e), (f), (g) or (h) of paragraph (1) apply, that part complies with the 

requirements referred to in the relevant sub-paragraph;

(c)   in a case to which sub-paragraph (c) of paragraph (1) applies, the whole building complies with the 

requirement referred to in that sub-paragraph; 

(d)  in a case to which sub-paragraph (i) of paragraph (1) applies—

(i)   that part and any sanitary conveniences provided in or in connection with that part comply with the 

requirements referred to in that sub-paragraph; and

(ii)   the building complies with requirement M1(a) of Schedule 1 to the extent that reasonable provision 
is made to provide either suitable independent access to that part or suitable access through the 
building to that part;

(e)   in a case to which subparagraph (j) applies in respect of a material change of use described in regulation 

5(b) or (g), that part complies with the requirement referred to in that subparagraph.

  (3)   Subject to paragraph (4), where there is a material change of use described in regulation 5(k), such work, if 

any, shall be carried out as is necessary to ensure that any external wall, or specified attachment, of the 
building only contains materials of European Classification A2-s1, d0 or A1, classified in accordance with 
BS EN 13501-1:2007+A1:2009 entitled “Fire classification of construction products and building elements. 
Classification using test data from reaction to fire tests” (ISBN 978 0 580 59861 6) published by the British 
Standards Institution on 30th March 2007 and amended in November 2009.

  (4)   Paragraph (3) does not apply to the items listed in regulation 7(3).

Requirements relating to a change to energy status

22.    Where there is a change to a building’s energy status, such work, if any, shall be carried out as is necessary to 

ensure that the building complies with the applicable requirements of Part L of Schedule 1.

Intention 

Regulations 6 and 22 of the Building Regulations set requirements for buildings to comply with 
Schedule 1 to the Building Regulations when a material change of use or a change to energy status 
occurs.

In the Secretary of State’s view, the requirements of regulations 6 and 22 are met by following the 
guidance in Section 11.

66  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R6, R22ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSION 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
Section 11: Work to elements in existing 
dwellings

General 
11.1  This section provides guidance for work to existing elements in dwellings, including all of the 

following types of work.

a.  Renovating an existing thermal element in an existing dwelling – follow paragraphs 11.2 to 11.4. 

b.  Making a material change of use to a dwelling – follow paragraphs 11.5 to 11.8.  

c.  Making a change to a dwelling that constitutes a change to energy status – follow paragraphs 

11.6 to 11.8.

NOTE: For new and replacement elements in existing dwellings, the guidance in Section 10 should 
be followed. 

Renovating thermal elements
11.2  Renovation of a thermal element means one of the following.

a.  Providing a new layer through cladding or rendering the external surface of a thermal element.

b.  Providing a new layer through dry-lining the internal surface of a thermal element.

c.  Replacing an existing layer through stripping down the element to expose basic structural 

components (e.g. bricks, blocks, rafters, joists, frame) and then rebuilding.

d.  Replacing the waterproof membrane on a flat roof.

e.  Providing cavity wall insulation.

11.3  If a thermal element is renovated and one of the following applies, then the whole of the thermal 

element should be improved to achieve at least the U-value given in Table 4.3, column (b).

a.  More than 50% of the surface of the individual thermal element is renovated (see paragraph 11.4).
b.  The work constitutes a major renovation. A major renovation is when more than 25% of the 

surface area of the external building envelope is renovated.

NOTE: If paragraph 4.13 applies, Appendix C provides examples of renovation of an existing thermal 
element that are technically, functionally or economically feasible.

11.4  When assessing the percentage area that will be renovated of an individual thermal element, 

consider whether the element is being renovated from the outside or the inside, following Diagram 
11.1 and Diagram 11.2, respectively.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

67

R6, R22, R23(1), L1(a)ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONFor example, if external render is being removed from the outer side of a wall, the area of the thermal element is the area of 
the elevation in which that wall sits.

Area of the thermal 
element being renovated

Total area of the 
thermal element

Diagram 11.1 

 Renovation of a thermal element from the outside

For example, if plaster is being removed from the inner side of a wall, the area of the thermal element is the area of external wall 
as viewed from inside the room. 

Area of the thermal 
element being renovated

Total area of the 
thermal element

Diagram 11.2   Renovation of a thermal element from the inside

68  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R6, R22, R23(1), L1(a)ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONMaterial change of use and change to energy status
11.5  A material change of use, in relation to dwellings, is when a building satisfies any of the following: 

a. 

is used as a dwelling, where previously it was not 

b.  contains a flat, where previously it did not 

c.  contains a greater or lesser number of dwellings than it did, having previously contained at least 

one dwelling. 

11.6  A change to energy status is when a dwelling was previously exempt from the energy efficiency 

requirements but now is not. The change to energy status applies to the building as a whole or to 
parts of the building that have been designed or altered to be used separately. For example, when 
a previously unheated space becomes part of the heated dwelling in a garage or loft conversion, a 
change to energy status applies to that space. 

NOTE: A material change of use may result in a change to energy status, for example if a previously 
unheated loft is converted into a flat. 

11.7  If there is a material change of use and/or a change to energy status, elements should satisfy all of 

the following. 

a.  Existing thermal elements should meet the limiting standards in Table 4.3, following the guidance 

in paragraphs 4.11 and 4.12. 

b. 

If both of the following apply to existing windows, roof windows, rooflights and doors 
(controlled fittings), they should be replaced to meet the limiting standards in Table 4.2. 

i.  They separate a conditioned space from an unconditioned space or the external 

environment. 

ii.  They have a U-value higher than either of the following.

•  For windows, roof windows and doors – 3.30W/(m2·K).

•  For rooflights – 3.80W/(m2·K), calculated by following paragraph 4.5.

In addition, all of the following should be met.

a.  New or replaced thermal elements should meet the standards in Table 4.2, following the 

guidance in paragraphs 4.7 and 4.8.  

b.  New or replaced windows, roof windows, rooflights and doors (controlled fittings) should meet 

the standards in Table 4.2. 

c.  The area of openings in the newly created dwelling should not be more than 25% of the total 

floor area. In buildings that contain more than one dwelling a larger percentage area of openings 
may be achieved by following the guidance in paragraph 11.8. 

d.  Any fixed building services including building automation and control systems and/or on-site 
electricity generation that are provided or extended should meet the standards in Sections 5 
and 6.

11.8  As an alternative to paragraph 11.7, in buildings that contain more than one dwelling, the Standard 
Assessment Procedure may be used to show that the dwelling primary energy usage and total CO2 
emissions from all dwellings in the building, after completion of the building work, would be no 
greater than if each dwelling had been improved following the guidance in paragraph 11.7. 

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

69

R6, R22, R23(1), L1(a)ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONRegulation 28: Consequential improvements 
to energy performance

This section deals with the requirements of regulation 28 of the Building Regulations 2010.

Regulation

Consequential improvements to energy performance 

28. 

(1)   Paragraph (2) applies to an existing building with a total useful floor area over 1,000m2 where the proposed 

building work consists of or includes—

(a)  an extension;

(b)  the initial provision of any fixed building services; or

(c)  an increase to the installed capacity of any fixed building services.

(2)   Subject to paragraph (3), where this paragraph applies, such work, if any, shall be carried out as is necessary 

to ensure that the building complies with the requirements of Part L of Schedule 1.

(3)   Nothing in paragraph (2) requires work to be carried out if it is not technically, functionally or economically 

feasible.

NOTE: Where the building control body is an approved inspector, see regulation 20 of the Building 
(Approved Inspectors etc.) Regulations 2010 (as amended).

Intention

In the Secretary of State’s view, where regulation 28 applies, the requirements of this regulation are 
met for existing buildings with a total useful floor area over 1000m2 by carrying out consequential 
improvements that are technically, functionally and economically feasible, by following the guidance 
in Section 12. 

70  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R28ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 12: Consequential improvements  

12.1  For an existing dwelling with a total useful floor area of over 1000m2, additional work may be 

required to improve the overall energy efficiency of the dwelling if proposed work consists of or 
includes any of the following.

a.  An extension.

b.  Providing any fixed building service in the dwelling for the first time.
c. 

Increasing the capacity of any fixed building service (which does not include doing so on 
account of renewable technology).

Consequential improvements should be carried out to ensure that the dwelling complies with Part 
L of the Building Regulations, to the extent that they are technically, functionally and economically 
feasible.

12.2  Technical guidance on consequential improvements is given in Approved Document L, Volume 2: 

Buildings other than dwellings.

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

71

R28ONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONAppendix A: Key terms

NOTE: Except for the items marked * (which 
are from the Building Regulations 2010), these 
definitions apply only to Approved Document L, 
Volume 1: Dwellings. 

Air barrier An air barrier controls air leakage into 
and out of the building envelope. This is usually in 
the form of a membrane.

Air permeability The measure of airtightness of 
the building fabric. It is defined as the air leakage 
rate per hour per m2 of envelope area at the test 
reference pressure differential of 50Pa or 4Pa.

•	 The limiting air permeability is the worst 

allowable air permeability. 

•	 The design air permeability is the target value 

set at the design stage. 

•	 The assessed air permeability is the value used 
in establishing the building emission rate and 
the building primary energy rate. The assessed 
air permeability is based on a measurement of 
the air permeability of the building concerned.

Airtightness The resistance of the building envelope 
to infiltration when ventilators are closed. The greater 
the airtightness at a given pressure difference across 
the envelope, the lower the infiltration. 

Automation A control function which automatically 
adjusts time and temperature settings based on 
occupancy detection and/or stored data from user 
adjustments over time. 

Benchmark Commissioning Checklist A checklist 
that can be used to show that commissioning 
has been carried out satisfactorily. (Benchmark is 
registered as a European Collective Mark by the 
Heating and Hot Water Industry Council, and the 
content is copyright.) 

Building automation and control system A system 
comprising all products, software and engineering 
services that can support energy efficient, economical  
and safe operation of heating, ventilation and air 
conditioning systems and on-site electricity 

generation through automatic controls and by 
facilitating the manual management of those building 
systems. 

Building control body A local authority building 
control department or an approved inspector.

*Building envelope (in relation to a building) 
Defined in regulation 35 as the walls, floor, roof, 
windows, doors, roof windows and rooflights. 

Centre pane U-value The U-value determined 
in the central area of the glazing unit, making no 
allowance for edge spacers or the window frame.

*Change to energy status Defined in regulation 
2(1) as any change which results in a building 
becoming a building to which the energy efficiency 
requirements of these Regulations apply, where 
previously it was not.

Circuit-watt Refers to the power consumed in 
lighting circuits by lamps and, where applicable, 
their associated control gear (including transformers 
and drivers) and power factor correction 
equipment.

Coefficient of performance (COP) A measure of the 
efficiency of a heat pump at specified source and 
sink temperatures, measured using the procedures 
in BS EN 14511-2.
•	 Heating COP = heat output / power input.
•	 % COP (COP � 100) is the heat generator 

efficiency.

Commissioning When, after all or part of a fixed 
building service or on-site electricity generation 
system has been installed, replaced or altered, the 
system is taken from a state of static completion to 
working order. Testing and adjusting are carried out 
for fixed building services, as necessary, to ensure 
that the whole system uses no more fuel and power 
than is reasonable in the circumstances. Testing 
and adjusting are carried out for on-site electricity 
generation systems, as necessary, to ensure that the 
whole system produces the maximum amount of 
electricity that is reasonable in the circumstances.   

72  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

AONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONFor each system, commissioning includes all of the 
following. 

•	 Setting to work.

•	 Regulation (that is, testing and adjusting 
repetitively) to achieve the specified 
performance.

•	 Calibration.

•	 Setting up and testing the associated automatic 

control systems.

•	 Recording the system settings and the 

performance test results that have been 
accepted as satisfactory.

Community heating system A system that supplies 
heat from a central source to more than one 
dwelling or premises within a single building.

Consequential improvements Those energy 
efficiency improvements required by regulation 28. 

*Controlled service or fitting Defined in regulation 
2(1) as a service or fitting in relation to which 
Part G [sanitation, hot water safety and water 
efficiency], H [drainage and waste disposal], J 
[combustion appliances and fuel storage systems], 
L [conservation of fuel and power] or P [electrical 
safety] of Schedule 1 imposes a requirement.

Cooling load The rate at which heat is removed 
from the space to maintain a desired air 
temperature.

District heat networks Supply heat from a central 
source to consumers, via a network of underground 
pipes carrying hot water. Heat networks can cover a 
large area or even an entire city, or can be relatively 
local, supplying a small cluster of buildings.

Dwelling A self-contained unit designed to 
accommodate a single household. 

NOTE: Buildings exclusively containing rooms 
for residential purposes, such as nursing homes, 
student accommodation and similar, are not 
dwellings. In such cases, Approved Document L, 
Volume 2: Buildings other than dwellings applies.

Dwelling emission rate The dwelling CO2 emission 
rate expressed as kgCO2/(m2·year) and determined 
using the Standard Assessment Procedure.

Dwelling fabric energy efficiency rate Expressed as 
kWh/(m2·year) and determined using the Standard 
Assessment Procedure.

Dwelling primary energy rate Expressed as kWhPE/
(m2·year) and determined using the Standard 
Assessment Procedure.

Economically feasible The capital cost of a 
measure will be recouped in energy savings within a 
reasonable time. For the purposes of this document, 
economically feasible means that the measure 
would achieve a simple payback after one of the 
following.

•	 7 years, for the installation of thermostatic 

room controls.

•	

15 years, for any other measure.

Emergency escape lighting The emergency lighting 
that illuminates an area for the safety of people 
leaving that area or for people attempting to stop a 
dangerous process before leaving that area. 

*Energy efficiency requirements Defined in 
regulation 2(1) as the requirements of regulations 23, 
25A, 25B, 26, 26A, 26C, 28, 40 and 43 and Part L of 
Schedule 1.

Energy performance certificate Defined in the 
Energy Performance of Buildings (England and 
Wales) Regulations 2012 as a certificate which:

a. 

in the case of a certificate entered on the 
register before 9th January 2013 complied 
with the requirements of regulation 11(1) of the 
Energy Performance of Buildings (Certificates 
and Inspections) (England and Wales) 
Regulations 2007;

b. 

in the case of a certificate entered on the 
register on or after 9th January 2013 complies 
with the requirements of regulation 9(1) of 
these Regulations; or

c.  complies with the requirements of regulation 

29 of the Building Regulations 2010.

Building Regulations 2010  
Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 
Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

73
73

AAONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONEnvelope area (the measured part of the building) 
The total area of all floors, walls and ceilings 
bordering the internal volume that is the subject of 
a pressure test. This includes walls and floors below 
external ground level. Overall internal dimensions 
are used to calculate this envelope area, and no 
subtractions are made for the area of the junctions 
of internal walls, floors and ceilings with exterior 
walls, floors and ceilings. 

Existing district heat network A district heat 
network that is either in operation or is under 
construction on 15 June 2022. For these purposes, 
under construction means any of the following.

•	 The building to house the energy centre has 

been constructed.

•	 There is a heat offtake agreement signed 

between the heat network and a third party.

•	 Excavation for pipework has been completed.

*Fixed building services Defined in regulation 2(1) as 
any part of, or any controls associated with:

a.  fixed internal or external lighting systems (but 
not including emergency escape lighting or 
specialist process lighting); 

b.  fixed systems for heating, hot water, air 

conditioning or mechanical ventilation; or

c.  any combination of systems of the kinds 

referred to in paragraph (a) or (b).

Fixed external lighting Lighting fixed to an external 
surface of the building and supplied from the 
occupier’s electrical system. It excludes lighting 
in common areas of blocks of flats and in other 
communal accessways.

Hard water Water which has a high mineral content. 
For the purposes of this approved document, hard 
water is water that has a total water hardness of 
greater than 200ppm of CaCO3.
Heating appliance or heat generator The part of a 
heating system that generates useful heat using one 
or more of the following processes. 

•	 The combustion of fuels in, for example, a boiler. 

•	 The Joule effect, taking place in the heating 

elements of an electric resistance heating system.

•	 Capturing heat from ambient air, ventilation 
exhaust air, or a water or ground heat source 
using a heat pump. 

Heating plant emission rate The annual CO2 
emissions from the fuel and power consumed by 
the heating plant to deliver space heating and hot 
water, offset by the emissions saved as a result 
of any electricity generated by the heating plant, 
divided by the heat output over a year. Measured in 
kilograms of CO2. 
Heating zone A conditioned area of a building 
which is on a single floor and has the same 
thermal characteristics and temperature control 
requirements throughout.

Intermediate floor A floor in a building above the 
ground floor. 

Light fitting A fixed light or a lighting unit, and can 
comprise one or more lamps and lamp holders, 
control gear and an appropriate housing. The 
control gear may be integrated in the lamp or 
located elsewhere, in or near the fixed light.

Light source lumens The sum of the average initial 
(100 hour) lumen output of all light sources in a 
luminaire.

Load compensation A control function that 
maintains internal temperature by varying the flow 
temperature from the heat generator relative to the 
measured response of the heating system. 

*Major renovation Defined in regulation 35 as the 
renovation of a building where more than 25% of 
the surface area of the building envelope undergoes 
renovation.

*Material change of use Defined in regulation 5 as:  
Where there is a change in the purposes for which 
or the circumstances in which a building is used, so 
that after that change:

a.  the building is used as a dwelling, where 

previously it was not;

b.  the building contains a flat, where previously it 

did not; 

c.  the building is used as an hotel or a boarding 

house, where previously it was not;

d.  the building is used as an institution, where 

previously it was not;

74  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 
74  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010
Building Regulations 2010

AAONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONe.  the building is used as a public building, where 

previously it was not;

f. 

the building is not a building described in 
classes 1 to 6 in Schedule 2, where previously it 
was;

g.  the building, which contains at least one 

dwelling, contains a greater or lesser number of 
dwellings than it did previously;

h.  the building contains a room for residential 

purposes, where previously it did not;

i. 

the building, which contains at least one room 
for residential purposes, contains a greater 
or lesser number of such rooms than it did 
previously;

j. 

the building is used as a shop, where it 
previously was not; or

k.  the building is a building described in regulation 

7(4)(a), where previously it was not.

Primary circulation An assembly of water fittings in 
which water circulates between a heat source and 
a primary heat exchanger inside a hot water storage 
vessel, including any space heating system.

Primary energy Energy, from renewable and non-
renewable sources, that has not undergone any 
conversion or transformation process.

Renewable technology Technology that uses 
renewable resources, which are naturally 
replenished on a human timescale, to produce 
electricity. Resources include wind, wave, marine, 
hydro, biomass and solar.

Rooflight A glazed unit installed out of plane with 
the surface of the roof on a kerb or upstand. Also 
sometimes referred to as a skylight.

Roof window A window installed in the same 
orientation as, and in plane with, the surrounding roof. 

*Room for residential purposes Defined in 
regulation 2(1) as a room, or a suite of rooms, 
which is not a dwelling-house or a flat and which 
is used by one or more persons to live and sleep 
and includes a room in a hostel, an hotel, a 
boarding house, a hall of residence or a residential 
home, but does not include a room in a hospital, 
or other similar establishment, used for patient 
accommodation.

Seasonal coefficient of performance (SCOP) A 
measure of the efficiency of a heat pump over the 
designated heating season, measured using the 
procedures in BS EN 14825.
Seasonal energy efficiency ratio (SEER) The total 
amount of cooling energy provided by a single 
cooling unit over a year, divided by the total energy 
input to that single cooling unit over the same year. 

Secondary circulation An assembly of water 
fittings in which water circulates in supply pipes or 
distributing pipes of hot water storage systems. 

Secondary heating A space heating appliance 
or system which operates separately from the 
main heating system in the dwelling and does not 
provide most of the heating in the dwelling – for 
example, a decorative fuel-effect fire in a room 
which also contains radiators for a central heating 
system.

SEDBUK (Seasonal Efficiency of Domestic Boilers 
in the UK) The methodology for determining boiler 
efficiency defined in the Standard Assessment 
Procedure, Appendix D.

Simple payback The amount of time it will take 
to recover the initial investment through energy 
savings, calculated by dividing the marginal 
additional cost of implementing an energy 
efficiency measure by the value of the annual 
energy savings achieved by that measure, taking no 
account of VAT. The following guidance should be 
used.

•	 The marginal additional cost is the additional 

cost (materials and labour) of incorporating, for 
example, additional insulation – not the whole 
cost of the work.

•	 The cost of implementing the measure should 
be based on prices current at the date when 
the application is made to the building control 
body and be confirmed in a report signed by a 
suitably qualified person.

•	 The annual energy savings should be estimated 
using the Standard Assessment Procedure.

Building Regulations 2010  
Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 
Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

75
75

AAONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSION•	 The energy prices that are current when the 

application is made to the building control body 
should be used when evaluating energy savings. 
Current prices are given on the BEIS website, at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/
quarterly-energy-prices.

Space cooling system A system for cooling the 
temperature of the air in a space.

Specialist process lighting Lighting to illuminate 
specialist tasks within a space rather than the space 
itself. Specialist process lighting includes theatre 
spotlights, projection equipment, lighting in TV and 
photographic studios, medical lighting in operating 
theatres and doctors’ and dentists’ surgeries, 
illuminated signs, coloured or stroboscopic lighting, 
and art objects with integral lighting, such as 
sculptures, decorative fountains and chandeliers.

Standard Assessment Procedure The current 
approved procedure for assessing the performance 
of dwellings in line with this document (Approved 
Document L, Volume 1). The Standard Assessment 
Procedure is detailed in The Government’s Standard 
Assessment Procedure for Energy Rating of 
Dwellings version 10. 

Target emission rate The maximum CO2 emission 
rate for the dwelling, expressed as kgCO2/(m2·year) 
and determined using the Standard Assessment 
Procedure.

Target fabric energy efficiency rate The minimum 
dwelling fabric energy efficiency, expressed as 
kWh/(m2·year) and determined using the Standard 
Assessment Procedure.

Target primary energy rate The maximum primary 
energy use for the dwelling in a year, expressed as 
kWhPE/(m2·year) and determined using the Standard 
Assessment Procedure.

Thermal bridging Occurs when part of a thermal 
element has significantly higher heat transfer than 
the materials surrounding it. 

*Thermal element Defined in regulation 2(3) and 
2(4) as follows.

2(3) In these Regulations “thermal element” means 
a wall, floor or roof (but does not include windows, 
doors, roof windows or roof-lights) which separates 
a thermally conditioned part of the building (“the 
conditioned space”) from— 

a.  the external environment (including the 

ground); or 

b. 

in the case of floors and walls, another part of 
the building which is— 

i.  unconditioned; 

ii.  an extension falling within class 7 of 

Schedule 2; or

iii.  where this paragraph applies, conditioned 

to a different temperature,

and includes all parts of the element between the 
surface bounding the conditioned space and the 
external environment or other part of the building 
as the case may be. 

2(4) Paragraph 2(3)(b)(iii) only applies to a building 
which is not a dwelling, where the other part of the 
building is used for a purpose which is not similar or 
identical to the purpose for which the conditioned 
space is used.

Thermal envelope The combination of thermal 
elements of a building that enclose a particular 
conditioned indoor space or group of indoor 
spaces.

Thermal separation Occurs where a dwelling and a 
conservatory or porch are divided by walls, floors, 
windows and doors to which one of the following 
applies. 

•	 The U-values are similar to, or in the case of a 
newly constructed conservatory or porch not 
exceeding, the U-values of the corresponding 
exposed elements elsewhere in the dwelling.

76  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 
76  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010
Building Regulations 2010

AAONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSION•	

In the case of a newly constructed conservatory 
or porch, windows and doors have similar 
draught-proofing provisions as the exposed 
windows and doors elsewhere in the dwelling.

Total useful floor area The total area of all 
enclosed spaces, measured to the internal face of 
the external walls. When calculating total useful 
floor area, both of the following should be taken 
into account.

•	 The area of sloping surfaces such as staircases, 
galleries, raked auditoria and tiered terraces 
should be taken as their area on plan.

•	 Areas that are not enclosed, such as open 

floors, covered ways and balconies, should be 
excluded.

NOTE: This area is the gross internal floor area 
as measured in accordance with the Code of 
Measuring Practice by the Royal Institution of 
Chartered Surveyors (RICS). 

U-value A measure of the ability of a building 
element or component to conduct heat from a 
warmer environment to a cooler environment. It is 
expressed as the quantity of heat (in watts) that will 
flow through 1m2 of area divided by the difference 
in temperature (in degrees K) between the internal 
and external environment. The unit is W/(m2·K).

Weather compensation A system which enables 
the operating flow temperature of a heating system 
to be varied. An external sensor communicates with 
one inside the boiler. The temperature is varied by 
either of the following.  

•	 Modulating the heat generator output (direct 

acting).

•	 Using a mixing valve to adjust the flow 
temperature to the heat emitters. 

Wet heating system When a heating appliance 
(usually a boiler) produces hot water which is 
distributed around the dwelling to heat emitters.

Building Regulations 2010  
Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 
Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

77
77

AAONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONAppendix B: Reporting evidence of compliance

BREL report
B1  The Buildings Regulations England Part L (BREL) report and photographic evidence should be 
provided to the building control body and to the building owner to show that building work 
complies with energy efficiency requirements. 

B2  SAP 10 will produce the BREL report for the building as a standard output option.
B3  Two versions of the BREL report should be produced, using the approved software.

a.  The first, the design stage BREL report, before works begin, to include all of the following.

i.  The target primary energy rate and dwelling primary energy rate.

ii.  The target emission rate and dwelling emission rate.

iii.  The target fabric energy efficiency rate and dwelling fabric energy efficiency rate.

iv.  A supporting list of specifications.

b.  The second, the as-built BREL report, to include all of the following.

i.  The target primary energy rate and as-built dwelling primary energy rate.

ii.  The target emission rate and as-built dwelling emission rate.

iii.  The target fabric energy efficiency rate and as-built dwelling fabric energy efficiency rate.

iv.  A supporting list of specifications and any changes to the list of specifications that was 

provided at design stage.

The building control body can then use these reports to help check that what was designed has been 
built. The software includes a facility to compare the design stage and as-built data input files and 
automatically produce a schedule of changes.

B4   The as-built BREL report should be signed by the person carrying out the SAP assessment to 

confirm that the as-built calculations are accurate and that the supporting documentary evidence 
and photographs have been reviewed (see paragraphs B6 and B7).

B5   The as-built BREL report should be signed by the developer to confirm that the dwelling has been 

constructed or completed according to the specifications in the report.

78  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

BONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONPhotographic evidence
B6   Photographs should be taken for each dwelling on a development as a record during the 

construction of a property. The photographs should be made available to the energy assessor and 
the building control body. Anyone may take the photographs.

B7  Photographs should be taken of typical details as listed below and should be unique to each 
property. One photograph per detail should be recorded. Additional images, such as a close-
up detail, should be provided only when necessary (see below). Photographs should be taken at 
appropriate construction stages for each detail when completed, but prior to closing-up works.

1.  Foundations/substructure and ground floor, to show thermal continuity and quality of insulation 

in the following places.

a.  At ground floor perimeter edge insulation.

b.  At external door threshold.

c.  Below damp-proof course on external walls.

2.  External walls: for each main wall type, to show thermal continuity and quality of insulation for 

the following.

a.  Ground floor to wall junction.

b.  Structural penetrating elements.

NOTE: For blown fill, photos should show clean cavities and clean brick ties with very limited 
mortar droppings.

3.  Roof: for each main roof type, to show thermal continuity and quality of insulation at the following.

a. 

Joist/rafter level.

b.  Eaves and gable edges.

4.  Openings: for each opening type (one image per wall or roof type is sufficient), to show thermal 

continuity and quality of insulation with photographs of the following.

a.  Window positioning in relation to cavity closer or insulation line.

b.  External doorset positioning in relation to cavity closer or insulation line

5.  Airtightness: additional photographs for all details 1–4 to show airtightness details (only if not 

included or visible in continuity of insulation image).

6.  Building services: for all plant associated with space heating, hot water, ventilation and low or 

zero carbon technology equipment within or on the building, show the following.

a.  Plant/equipment identification label(s), including make/model and serial number.

b.  Primary pipework continuity of insulation.

c.  Mechanical ventilation ductwork continuity of insulation (for duct sections outside the 

thermal envelope). 

B8  Photographs should be digital and of sufficient quality and high enough resolution to allow a 

qualitative audit of the subject detail. Close-up photographs may be needed where a long shot 
image provides insufficient detail. More than one image of each detail may be needed. Geo-
location should be enabled to confirm the location, date and time of each image. Each image 
file name should include a plot number and detail reference according to the numbers used in 
paragraph B7. For example, Plot 1 eaves detail would be P1/3b.

Building Regulations 2010  
Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 
Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

79
79

ABONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONAppendix C: Work to thermal elements

C1  This appendix provides guidance on the cost-effectiveness of insulation measures during various 
types of work on a thermal element. Table C1 sets out target U-values that would be considered 
to represent reasonable improvements in ordinary cases and examples of construction that may be 
used to achieve the proposed performance. 

C2 

If it is not reasonable to meet the target U-values in Table C1, considering technical risk and 
practicality of the work in relation to the dwelling and impacts on adjoining buildings, then the 
U-value should be as close to the target value as practically possible. 

C3  The final column in Table C1 provides guidance on specific issues that may need to be considered 
to determine an appropriate course of action. In general, the proposed works should take account 
of all of the following.

a.  The requirements of any other relevant parts of Schedule 1 to the Building Regulations.

b.  The general guidance on technical risk relating to insulation improvements contained in the 

Building Research Establishment’s BR 262.

c.  For buildings falling within the categories set out in paragraphs 0.8 to 0.13, Historic England’s 
Energy Efficiency and Historic Buildings: Application of Part L of the Building Regulations to 
Historic and Traditionally Constructed Buildings.

C4  General guidance is available from relevant British Standards.

Target 
U-value 
W/(m2·K)

0.16

0.16

Proposed works

Pitched roof constructions

Renewal of roof covering: No 
living accommodation in the 
roof void. Existing insulation (if 
any) at ceiling level, less than 
50mm, in poor condition, and/
or likely to be significantly 
disturbed or removed as part 
of the planned work

Renewal of roof covering: 
Existing insulation in good 
condition and will not be 
significantly disturbed by 
proposed works. Existing 
insulation thickness between 
50mm and 100mm

Typical construction

Comments (reasonableness, practicability 
and cost-effectiveness)

Provide loft 
insulation – 250mm 
mineral fibre or 
cellulose fibre as a 
quilt laid between 
and across ceiling 
joists or loose fill or 
equivalent

Top up loft 
insulation to at least 
250mm mineral fibre 
or cellulose fibre as 
quilt laid between 
and across ceiling 
joists or loose fill or 
equivalent. This may 
be boarded out

Assess condensation risk in roof space and 
make appropriate provision in accordance 
with the requirements of Part C relating to 
the control of condensation (BS 5250 and  
BS EN ISO 13788). Additional provision 
may be required to provide access to and 
insulation of services in the roof void

Assess condensation risk in roof space  
and make appropriate provision in line with 
the requirements of Part C relating to the 
control of condensation (BS 5250 and  
BS EN ISO 13788). Additional provision may 
be required to provide insulation and access 
to services in the roof void

Where the loft is already boarded and the 
boarding will not be removed as part of the 
work, the practicality of insulation works 
needs to be considered

80  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

CTable C1   Cost-effective U-value targets when undertaking renovation works to thermal elementsONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONProposed works

Renewal of the ceiling to cold 
loft space. Existing insulation 
at ceiling level will be removed 
as part of the works

Target 
U-value 
W/(m2·K)

0.16

Renewal of roof covering: 
Living accommodation in 
roof space (room-in-the-roof 
arrangement), with or without 
dormer windows

0.16

Dormer window constructions

Renewal of cladding to side 
walls

0.30

Renewal of roof covering

–

0.16

Flat roof constructions

Renewal of roof covering: 
Existing insulation, if any, less 
than 100mm, mineral fibre 
(or equivalent resistance) or 
in poor condition, and likely 
to be significantly disturbed 
or removed as part of the 
planned work

Typical construction

Comments (reasonableness, practicability 
and cost-effectiveness)

Provide loft 
insulation – 250mm 
mineral fibre or 
cellulose fibre as a 
quilt laid between 
and across ceiling 
joists or loose fill or 
equivalent. This may 
be boarded out

Cold structure – 
insulation (thickness 
dependent on 
material) placed 
between and below 
rafters

Warm structure – 
insulation placed 
between and above 
rafters

Insulation (thickness 
dependent on 
material) placed 
between and/or 
fixed to outside of 
wall studs, or fully 
external to existing 
structure, depending 
on construction

Follow the guidance 
on pitched or flat 
roof constructions, 
as appropriate

Assess condensation risk in roof space and 
make appropriate provision in accordance 
with the requirements of Part C relating to 
the control of condensation (BS 5250 and  
BS EN ISO 13788). Additional provision may 
be required to provide insulation and access 
to services in the roof void

Where the loft is already boarded and the 
boarding will not be removed as part of the 
work, insulation may be installed from the 
underside; however, the target U-value may 
not be achievable

Assess condensation risk (particularly 
interstitial condensation) and make 
appropriate provision in accordance with  
the requirements of Part C relating to the 
control of condensation (BS 5250 and  
BS EN ISO 13788)
Where there is an increase in structural 
thickness (particularly in terraced dwellings), 
practical considerations may necessitate a 
lower performance target

Assess condensation risk and make 
appropriate provision in accordance with  
the requirements of Part C relating to the 
control of condensation (BS 5250 and  
BS EN ISO 13788)

Assess condensation risk and make 
appropriate provision in accordance with  
the requirements of Part C relating to the 
control of condensation (BS 5250 and  
BS EN ISO 13788)

Insulation placed 
between and over 
joists as required to 
achieve the target 
U-value

Assess condensation risk and make 
appropriate provision in accordance with  
the requirements of Part C relating to the 
control of condensation (BS 5250 and 
BS EN ISO 13788). Also see BS 6229 for  
design guidance

Building Regulations 2010  
Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 
Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

81
81

ACTable C1   ContinuedONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONProposed works

Renewal of the ceiling to flat 
roof area. Existing insulation 
removed as part of the works

Target 
U-value 
W/(m2·K)

0.16

Solid wall constructions

Renewal of internal finish to 
external wall or applying a 
finish for the first time

0.30

Typical construction

Comments (reasonableness, practicability 
and cost-effectiveness)

Insulation placed 
between and to 
underside of joists 
to achieve target 
U-value

Dry-lining to inner 
face of wall – 
insulation between 
studs fixed to wall 
to achieve target 
U-value (thickness 
dependent on 
insulation and stud 
material used)

Insulated wall board 
fixed to internal 
wall surface to 
achieve target 
U-value (thickness 
dependent on 
material used)

Assess condensation risk and make 
appropriate provision in accordance with  
the requirements of Part C relating to the 
control of condensation (BS 5250 and  
BS EN ISO 13788). Also see BS 6229 for design 
guidance.

Where insulation would unacceptably reduce 
ceiling height, a lower performance target 
may be appropriate

Assess the impact on internal floor area. In 
general it is reasonable to accept a reduction 
not exceeding 5% in the area of a room. 
However, the use of the room, and the space 
needed for people to move around and 
for fixtures, fittings and furniture should be 
assessed

If acoustic attenuation issues are particularly 
important (e.g. where insulation is returned 
at party walls) a less demanding U-value may 
be more appropriate – the target U-value 
may have to be increased to 0.35 or above, 
depending on the circumstances

Assess condensation and other moisture 
risks and make appropriate provision in 
accordance with the requirements of Part C 
relating to the control of condensation  
(BS 5250 and BS EN ISO 13788). This 
will usually require the provision of 
vapour control and damp protection 
of components. Guidance on the risks 
involved is provided in the Building Research 
Establishment’s BR 262 and, on the technical 
options, in Energy Saving Trust publications

Assess technical risk and impact of increased 
wall thickness on adjoining buildings

Renewal of finish or cladding 
to external wall area or 
elevation (render or other 
cladding) or applying a finish 
or cladding for the first time

0.30

External insulation 
system with 
rendered finish or 
cladding to give 
target U-value

82  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 
82  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010
Building Regulations 2010

ACTable C1   ContinuedONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONProposed works

Ground floor constructions

Renovation of a solid or 
suspended floor involving the 
replacement of screed or a 
timber floor deck

Target 
U-value 
W/(m2·K)

See 
comment

Typical construction

Comments (reasonableness, practicability 
and cost-effectiveness)

Solid floor – replace 
screed with an 
insulated floor deck 
to maintain existing 
floor level

Suspended timber 
floor – fit insulation 
between floor joists 
before replacing 
floor deck

The cost-effectiveness of floor insulation 
is complicated by the impact of the size 
and shape of the floor (ratio of perimeter 
to area). In many cases, existing uninsulated 
floor U-values are already relatively low 
when compared with wall and roof U-values. 
Where the existing floor U-value is greater 
than 0.70W/(m2·K), added insulation is likely 
to be cost-effective. Analysis shows that 
the cost–benefit curve for the thickness of 
added insulation is flat; therefore, a target 
U-value of 0.25W/(m2·K) is appropriate, 
subject to other technical constraints 
(adjoining floor levels, etc.)

Building Regulations 2010  
Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 
Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

83
83

ACTable C1   ContinuedONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONAppendix D: Specification for a home built 
with a heat pump

D1  This appendix provides a good practice specification for a dwelling built with a heat pump. 
D2  By using this specification, the dwelling should pass the target primary energy rate and target 

emission rate. However, this should be checked through energy calculations.

Element or system

Reference value for target setting(1)

Opening areas (windows, roof windows, 
rooflights and doors)

Same as for actual dwelling not exceeding a total area of openings of 25% 
of total floor area(2)

External walls including semi-exposed 
walls

U = 0.18 W/(m²·K)

Party walls

Floors

Roofs

U = 0

U = 0.13 W/(m²·K)

U = 0.11 W/(m²·K)

Opaque door (less than 30% glazed area)

U = 1.0 W/(m²·K)

Semi-glazed door (30–60% glazed area) U = 1.0 W/(m²·K)

Windows and glazed doors with 
greater than 60% glazed area

U = 1.2 W/(m²·K) 
Frame factor = 0.7

Roof windows

Rooflights

Ventilation system

Air permeability

U = 1.2 W/(m²·K), when in vertical position (for correction due to angle, see 
specification in SAP 10 Appendix R)

U = 1.7 W/(m2·K), when in horizontal position (for correction due to angle, 
see specification in SAP 10 Appendix R)

Natural ventilation with intermittent extract fans

5 m³/(h·m²) at 50 Pa

Main heating fuel (space and water)

Mains electricity

Heating system

Heat pump(3)

Heating system controls

Air source heat pump and radiators
Design flow temperature = 45°C

Space heating efficiency = 250%
Water heating efficiency = 250% 

Weather compensation
Either: 
–  single storey dwelling in which the living area is greater than 70% of 

total floor area: programmer and room thermostat

–  any other dwelling: time and temperature zone control, thermostatic 

radiator valves

84  Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

DTable D1   Summary of notional dwelling specification for new dwellingsONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSIONHot water system

Stored hot water in cylinder, heated by air source heat pump  
with back-up immersion heating
Separate time control for space and water heating

Wastewater heat recovery (WWHR)

None

Hot water cylinder

Lighting

If cylinder, declared loss factor = 0.85 ´ (0.2 + 0.051 V2/3) kWh/day 
where V is the volume of the cylinder in litres

Fixed lighting capacity (lm) = 185 ´ total floor area
Efficacy of all fixed lighting = 80 lm/W

Air conditioning

Photovoltaic (PV) system

None

None

NOTES:
1.  Changes from the notional dwelling specification (Table 1.1) are in bold.
2.  See SAP 10 for details.
3.  Space heating and water heating efficiencies as calculated in SAP 10; this is different from the COP.

Building Regulations 2010  
Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 
Approved Document L Volume 1, 2021 edition 

85
85

ADTable D1   ContinuedONLINE VERSIONONLINE VERSION