Unofficial translation from Finnish. Legally binding only in Finnish and Swedish. 

Decree of the Ministry of the Environment 

on the operational safety of buildings 

By decision of the Ministry of the Environment, the following is enacted under section 117d, 
subsection 2 and section 117k, subsection 3 of the Land Use and Building Act (132/1999), as it 
stands in section 117d, subsection 2 of Act 958/2012 and section 117k, subsection 3 of Act 
812/2017: 

Chapter 1 

General 

Section 1 

Scope of application 

This Decree shall apply to new buildings, additions to buildings and spaces increasing the 

floor area of buildings and to the immediate vicinity of building sites.  

This Decree is to be applied to renovation and alteration work only if the original solution is 
evidently  unsuitable  for  reasons  related  to  safety  or  health.  In  other  cases,  renovation  and 
alteration work can be carried out according to the original solution. Alteration work must not 
weaken the safety of the building. 

This  Decree  shall  apply  to  changes  to  the  intended  purpose  of  a  building  if  the  intended 
purpose of the building or part of the building is changed such that it is associated with a higher 
risk.  

Section 2 

Operational safety of buildings 

According to their tasks, the principal designer, building designer and specialised designer 
must ensure that the building is designed in such a way that it fulfils the essential technical, 
functional and architectural safety requirements for its purpose.  

Chapter 2 

Prevention of falls and missteps 

Section 3 

Staircases 

Staircases must be safe, sufficiently spacious and suitable for their purpose. The surface of 

stairs the must not be slippery.  

Directive 2015/1535/EU (32015L1535) of the European Parliament and of the Council; OJ L 241, 17 September 2015, p. 1)  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The  minimum  width  of  indoor  stairs  in  an  evacuation  area  is  0.85  metres.  Handrails  and 

skirting may, however, extend into this width. 

All evacuation areas must be designed in such a way that it is possible to transport an immobile 
individual on a stretcher via the exit route. If the indoor access route leading to an evacuation 
area in a non-residential building is via the indoor stairs in the area, these stairs must be wide 
enough that they can be used to transport an immobile individual on a stretcher. 

The stairs between floor levels must be covered. If a residential block of flats does not have a 
lift, the stairs between floor levels must have natural light and at least one intermediate landing. 

Section 4 

Dimensions of indoor staircases 

The ratio between the riser and the tread of stair steps must be such that the staircase is easy 

to use for its intended purpose.   

In the entrance halls and other indoor areas of administrative, service and business premises 
and in assembly areas, the riser of the steps must be no more than 160 millimetres and the tread 
must be no less than 300 millimetres. The riser of the indoor steps of dwelling units and living 
quarters  may  be  no  more  than  190  millimetres,  and  the  tread  must  be  no  less  than  250 
millimetres. The rise of the indoor steps of other spaces intended for everyday use may be no 
more than 180 millimetres, and the tread must be no less than 270 millimetres. If stairs are used 
only as an emergency exit and if they lead to spaces in a dwelling or accommodation facility 
other than those that are necessary for living, the riser may be no more than 220 millimetres and 
the tread must be no less than 220 millimetres.  

The riser of the steps in an exit may be no more than 180 millimetres. The tread must be no 
less than 270 millimetres. If the stairs are located in an exit that is not also used for ordinary 
movement within the building, the riser of the steps may be a maximum of 200 millimetres. 

Section 5 

Dimensions of outdoor staircases 

The tread of steps in covered or heated outdoor staircases must be no less than 300 millimetres, 
and the riser may be no more than 160 millimetres. The tread of steps in uncovered or unheated 
outdoor staircases must be no less than 390 millimetres, and the riser may be no more than 130 
millimetres. 

Section 6 

Landings 

The landings in the indoor and outdoor areas of a building must be safe, sufficiently spacious 
and suitable for their purpose. The side edges of stairs and landings must be fitted with a raised 
camber to prevent slipping over the edge if a cube measuring more than 50 millimetres in width 
is able to pass through the opening between the plane level and the handrail or wall. The distance 
between a door that opens onto a landing and the upper edge of the ramp or flight of stairs must 
be no less than 400 millimetres on the side wall and no less than 1,500 millimetres on the end 
wall. A landing measuring at least 800 millimetres in length must be reserved in front of and 
behind a door located in an exit route. 

Windows, hatches and other similar openings located on the landings of a building that are 
intended as places where people spend time or pass through must be designed to withstand the 
weight of a person, if there is any danger of falling.   

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 7 

Barriers 

A barrier must be constructed anywhere in the building or its vicinity where there is a drop 
exceeding half a metre and there is a danger of falling or misstepping, and the nature of the 
activity concerned does not require the absence of a barrier. The barrier must be safe and suitable 
for its purpose. The barrier may be a guardrail or an open railing. 

A guardrail must be used at points with a level difference of over 0.7 metres, if these can be 
accessed by children. The protective part of the barrier must extend to a height of at least 0.7 
metres from the surface of the landing or step.  The barrier must not feature horizontal structures 
or patterns that make it possible to climb. An open railing can be used in places to which children 
do not have access or where there is no danger of falling.  

Instead  of  a  barrier,  some  other  arrangement  may  be  used  to  prevent  falling  or  otherwise 
achieve the required level of safety, provided that the difference in height does not exceed one 
metre.  

The total height of the barrier must be one metre if the drop is no more than six metres. At a 
height greater than this, the total height of the barrier must be 1.2 metres. On a balcony that 
serves only a single dwelling, a barrier of one metre in height is sufficient, irrespective of the 
drop. 

The height of a barrier in a dwelling’s indoor areas may, however, be at least 0.9 metres if the 

drop is less than three metres. 

Section 8 

Structure of barriers and staircases 

Barriers and staircases must be designed to withstand loads in accordance with the intended 

use of the premises for the entire serviceable life of the structure. 

If the protective part of the barrier contains only vertical structures, a cube with edges of no 
more than 100 millimetres may pass through its openings. In the case of other types of protective 
parts,  a  cube  with  edges  of  no  more  than  30  millimetres  may  pass  through  the  openings. 
However, a horizontal gap in a protective part must be no higher than ten millimetres. 

A cube with edges of no more than 200 millimetres may pass between the upper edge of the 
barrier and the protective part. A cube with edges of no more than 50 millimetres may pass 
between the lower edge of a barrier’s protective part and the landing or the upper surface or 
edge of a step. 

A cube of no more than 100 millimetres may pass between the stair steps. 

Section 9 

Handrails 

On stairs and ramps, a handrail must be installed for the entire length and on both sides of the 
structure. Where necessary, two handrails, one above the other, must be installed in order to 
take into account children and users of wheelchairs. A handrail must be designed and shaped so 
that it allows a firm grip.  A handrail and its ending must be shaped safely and must continue 
past the start and end points of the structure. The handrail must continue onto the intermediate 
landing without interruption.  

In public outdoor and indoor spaces, and in business and service premises, a handrail must 
continue at least 300 millimetres past the start and end points of the structure, and in the case of 
stairs or ramps that have a width exceeding 2.4 metres and are located in assembly areas, it must 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
also be placed so as to divide the passageway into parts no wider than the above-mentioned 
width.  

Chapter 3 

Safety of structural elements and fixtures 

Section 10 

Brightness and lighting 

A building and its environment must be lit in a way that enables safe use and servicing. The 

lighting must not cause glare that endangers safety.  

The building’s surfaces and lighting must be such that they achieve the contrasts in brightness 

needed for observation. 

Ramps, steps, thresholds and differences in levels in passageways must be clearly indicated 

using lighting and surface brightness contrasts or warning signs. 

Section 11 

Glass structures  

The breaking of a glass structure or other light-permeable structure of a building must not 

cause a danger of falling or a danger of injury from fragments falling onto persons below. 

A glass structure or other light-permeable structure, along with its mountings, must withstand 
the load to which it is normally subject, unless the structure is protected by a fixed collision 
barrier.   

Windows, glass walls and glass doors into which there is a danger of collision must be marked 

in such a way that they can be easily noticed. Their glazing must be made of safety glass.  

Section 12 

Floor surfaces 

Floor surfaces must be sufficiently level and manufactured from a suitable material, taking 
into  account  the  intended  use  of  the  premises,  so  that  there  is  minimal  risk  of  stumbling  or 
slipping. 

Section 13 

Doors and gates 

A building’s doors and gates must be easy to open, even if conditions change.  
Doors, gates and boom barriers must operate safely and in such a way that they do not cause 

a danger of an accident. They must be equipped with appropriate safety fittings.  

The Government Decree on the Accessibility of Buildings (241/2017) and the Ministry of the 
Environment  Decree  on  the  Fire  Safety  of  Buildings  (848/2017)  shall  apply  to  other 
characteristics of doors.   

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 14 

Headroom 

The  minimum  height  of  a  passageway  in  a  living  space  is  2,100  millimetres.  At  a  door 

opening, the height may be reduced by the height of any necessary frames and thresholds. 

The headroom of a gate other than one at or leading to an exit, and of a gate inside a dwelling, 

may be 1,950 millimetres. 

Section 15 

Safety fittings 

A building must be equipped with durable safety solutions and safety fittings that are suitable 

for its use.  

In  dwellings  and  other  premises  that  are  used  by  children, restrictors  must  be  installed  on 
windows and other openings where there may be a danger of falling, and these must be such 
that they limit the easy opening of the window to 100 millimetres. Any restrictors placed on 
windows used as emergency exits must, however, be easily releasable by an adult. 

Ladders and other structural elements at emergency exits and service routes must be designed 

and constructed so that they can also be used in an emergency situation. 

The free opening of the vertical hatch or window of an emergency exit must be at least 600 
millimetres in height and 500 millimetres in width; however, the sum of these must be at least 
1,500 millimetres. The opening of a horizontal hatch must be at least 600 x 600 millimetres. 

Chapter 4 

Safety of outdoor areas 

Section 16 

Driveways and parking areas 

The driveway and parking area at a plot or building site must be separated from pedestrian, 
play and recreation areas. A driveway must not intersect a walkway leading to a play area. If it 
is  impossible  to  avoid  such  an  intersection,  a  structural  solution  must  be  used  to  mark  the 
crossing places. 

 Routes intended for vehicle traffic must be located in a way that does not restrict pedestrian 

routes or the space required for opening doors and gates. 

Section 17 

Play and recreation areas 

Any abrupt level differences of over 0.7 metres and any precipices located in the vicinity of 
common play and recreation areas associated with buildings with more than two dwellings must 
be  indicated  by  appropriate  barriers  or  suitable  planted  areas,  or  outfitted  with  a  base  that 
cushions any fall. 

Passageways  in  yards,  along  with  their  gates  and  ramps,  must  be  safe  and  furnished  with 

appropriate barriers and handrails. 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Play area equipment must be safe, and the structure of the bases of the equipment must be 

suitable for their purpose as well as shock-absorbing. 

Section 18 

Protection of passageways and recreation areas 

Entrances and passageways to playgrounds and recreation areas used in the wintertime, as 
well as street areas surrounding the building and other public areas, must be protected from 
snow and ice falling from the roof of the building using snow barriers, taking into account the 
pitch of the roof. In addition, the entrance must be protected against snow loads with a covering. 

Section 19 

Height of protruding structural elements 

The free height from the ground or from the surface of a driveway or walkway of the lower 
edge  of  a  structural  element,  device  or  equipment  protruding  from  the  building,  such  as  a 
balcony, bay window, sign, lighting device or awning, must be at least 2.2 metres, unless the 
area is protected so as to prevent the danger of collision. 

Chapter 5 

Safety of assembly areas 

Section 20 

Assembly areas 

Assembly areas must be designed and built in a way that is suitable for their use. 

Section 21 

Number of persons in assembly areas 

The maximum intended number of persons that may be simultaneously present in an assembly 
area is the combined number of persons permitted in the assembly rooms. The requirements set 
in  the  building  permit  for  the  characteristics  of  the  space  are  determined  according  to  the 
intended number of persons. 

The  maximum  number  of  persons  in  an  assembly  area  is  to  be  calculated  based  on  the 
characteristics of the different room areas in the space so that the maximum number of persons 
in a room with fixed seats is determined based on the number of seats. In rooms that do not have 
fixed  seats  but  for  which  furnishings  are  presented  in  the  approved  designs,  the  maximum 
number of persons is also determined based on the number of seats. In rooms with no fixed seats 
or furnishings, the number of persons shall be calculated to be two persons per square metre. 

When calculating the number of persons per square metre of room area, the following spaces 
are not included: stages, speaking rostrums or other such areas, cloakrooms, kitchen facilities, 
washing facilities, toilets and storage rooms. 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 22 

Seats in assembly areas 

Seats must be fixed to a base if the floor of the seating area is sloped or if there are level 

differences between the floors of the respective rows of seats. 

On a level floor, seats may be detached. If there are more than 60 chairs in a space, they must 

be linked to one another in at least four groups, unless the chairs are placed around tables. 

Fixed or linked seats must be arranged as rows of seating with an access route on the side of 

the rows. 

Section 23 

Auditoriums 

Level differences of over 500 millimetres must be equipped with an appropriate safety barrier, 
railing or handrail. The barrier in front of the lowest row of seats in a tiered auditorium balcony 
may be in the form of a guardrail 0.7 metres in height with panelling to protect against falls if 
only the said row of seating can be accessed via the passageway between the row and the barrier. 
Standing areas must be terraced so that it is safe to move in the rows. The depth of standing 

rows must be at least half a metre. 

Unauthorised  persons  must  be  prevented  from  accessing  the  controls  for  mechanically 

movable parts of the auditorium. 

Section 24 

Access routes 

The access route in the seating area or standing auditorium must be directly accessible from 

the end of each row. 

The width of access routes in assembly areas with a maximum capacity of 60 persons must 
be at least 900 millimetres. In spaces intended for more than 60 persons, the width of the access 
route must be at least 1,200 millimetres. 

The free width of the passageway between rows of seats must be in accordance with Table 1 
in relation to the number of persons using the passageway and the type of seats and depending 
on whether there are access routes at both ends or only one end of the passageway.  

Table 1 

Free width of the passageway in relation to the number of seats 

Free minimum width of 
passageway 

400 mm 

500 mm 

600 mm 

900 mm 

                           number of seats in the row 

Fixed seats,  
Access routes at both ends  
Access route at only one end 

Linked seats,  
Access routes at both ends 
Access route at only one end 

< 50 
< 10 

< 28 
< 8 

< 40 
< 10 

< 16 
< 8 

7 

< 60 
< 15 

< 40 
< 12 

> 60 
< 30 

> 40 
< 24 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The slope of the floor surface in the seating area and access route may not exceed 8 per cent 
(1:12.5). Section 5 of the Government Decree on the Accessibility of Buildings (241/2017) shall 
apply to the access routes leading to accessible viewing areas. 

Chapter 6 

Safety of servicing 

Section 25 

Servicing possibilities 

It must be possible to access and service all parts of a building that require regular cleaning, 
sweeping,  maintenance  or  inspection  without  endangering  the  safety  of  employers  and 
bystanders.  

There  must  be  safe  and  easily  accessible,  uninterrupted  access  routes  to  any  chimneys, 
ventilation equipment and other building equipment and structural elements that are located on 
the roof of the building and that must be accessed regularly. A roof with a pitch greater than 1:8 
must  be  constructed  making  appropriate  use  of  walkways,  roof  ladders,  safety  ladders,  roof 
stairs, roof treads and foot rails. 

In buildings more than 9 metres and at most 28 metres in height, the attic and roof must be 
accessible  via  the  interior  and  exterior  of  the  building;  in  buildings  more  than  28  metres  in 
height, these must be accessible via the interior. 

A building with a height exceeding 9 metres must be equipped with anchoring structures for 
safety  lines.  A  building  must  also  have  anchoring  structures  and  equipment  for  suspended 
scaffolds if no other functional solution has been designed for façade maintenance. 

Chapter 7 

Safety of vehicles and goods transport 

Section 26 

Goods transport and maintenance traffic at the building site 

The vehicle traffic area of a building and its courtyard must be safe and appropriate. 
A safe and marked access route must be reserved for pedestrians in connection with vehicle 
traffic and goods transport routes, doors and gates in the yards of buildings other than single-
family houses, if pedestrian traffic through them is necessary. 

The  structures  and  arrangements  for  the  supply  of  goods  in  a  building  must  be  safe  and 
appropriate.  The  loading  dock  and  ramp  must  be  proportionate  to  the  size  of  loads  and  the 
amount of goods transport. The loading area must be safe and appropriate. Barriers on loading 
docks must not impede loading and unloading. 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 8 

Transitional provisions and entry into force 

Section 27 

Entry into force 

This Decree enters into force on 1 January 2018. 
The provisions in force upon the entry into force of this Decree will apply to projects that are 

pending upon the entry into force of this Decree. 

Helsinki, 20 December 2017 

Kimmo Tiilikainen, Minister of the Environment, Energy and Housing 

Senior Architect Pekka Lukkarinen 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
