Unofficial translation.  
Legally binding only in Finnish and Swedish 

Decree of the Ministry of the Environment  

on water and sewerage systems of buildings 

By decision of the Ministry of the Environment, the following is hereby laid down pursuant 
to section 117 c, subsection 3; section 117 d, subsection 2; section 117 f, subsection 3; section 
117 g, subsection 4; section 117 i, subsection 4; section 122 a, subsection 3; and section 150 f, 
subsection 4 of the Land Use and Building Act (132/1999), as laid down in section 117 c, sub-
section 3; section 117 d, subsection 2; section 117 f, subsection 3; and section 117 i, subsection 
4 of Act 958/2012, and section 117 g, subsection 4 by Act 1151/2016, and section 122 a, sub-
section 3 and section 150 f, subsection 4 of Act 41/2014: 

Chapter 1 

General 

Section 1 

Scope  

This Decree applies to the design and construction of water and sewerage systems of new 
buildings as well as those located on property. The Decree also applies to building extensions, 
increases of calculated floor area, alteration and renovation work as well as alteration of the 
intended use of the building. 

Section 2 

Definitions 

In this Decree: 
1) special water system means equipment for the conveyance of other than household water;  
2) storm water means rainwater or meltwater to be conveyed from the ground surface, the 

roof of a building or from other similar surfaces; 

3)  air  gap  means  the  free  vertical  distance  between  the  bottom  edge  (or  equivalent)  of  a 
plumbing fixture’s supply pipe and the highest possible water level in the tank (or equivalent) 
below it; 

4) service pipe means a water pipe that serves two or more water points; 
5) waste water means, in general, water to be conveyed away via the sewerage system that is 

chemically, microbiologically, physically or otherwise polluted; 

6) support means a holder that supports a pipe or sewer; 
7) throttling valve means a device for regulating the water flow;  
8) fixed point means the anchorage of a water pipe or sewer which prevents movement of the 

pipe from its place of support; 

Directive 2015/1535/EU (32015L1535) of the European Parliament and of the Council; OJ L 241, 17.9.2015, p. 1  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9) collector sewer means a sewer to which two or more drainage points are connected; 
10) connector pipe means a water pipe by which the plumbing fixtures are connected to the 

service pipe; 

11) connector sewer means a sewer by which a drainage point is connected to the collector 

sewer; 

12)  connecting  point  means  a  point  at  which the  building’s  water  and  sewerage  system  is 

connected to the water and sewerage system network of a water supply plant; 

13) domestic hot water means water produced by the heating of household water; 
14) design rainfall means the maximum rainfall occurring within ten minutes; 
15) design flow means the base flow value used to design water pipes or sewers; 
16) standard flow means the base flow value either obtainable from a water point or to be 

conveyed to a drainage point; 

17) height of backwater means the approved maximum level to which the water level in a 

sewer can rise at the point where it joins the property; 

18) backwater valve means a valve which permits the flow of sewage in one direction only; 
19) pressure drainage means a sewerage system in which waste water, storm water or foun-

dation drainage water is pumped; 

20) foundation drainage water means water that has infiltrated into the ground and is con-
veyed to a sewer or other place of discharge in order to dry the base and foundations of a build-
ing; 

21) vertical (riser) sewer means a sewer whose gradient relative to the vertical plane is less 

than 45°; 

22) fire-prevention water system means equipment intended to extinguish fires; 
23) shutoff valve means a device to open up or shut off water flow; 
24) household water means water that is used for drinking water, for preparing food and for 
other household use as well as for preparing, processing, storage and marketing of food products 
in compliance with the provisions of section 16 on household potable water of the Health Pro-
tection Act (763/1994); 

25) service water pipe means a water pipe that connects the property’s water system to the 

common water pipe of a number of properties; 

26) service sewer means a sewer that connects a property’s sewer to the common sewer of a 

number of properties; 

27) stack vent means a pipe to ventilate a sewer and to even out pressure fluctuations therein; 
28) vacuum relief valve means a device which, when a specified degree of negative pressure 
occurs in a pipe or device, opens a link to the surrounding air and thus prevents the occurrence 
of a siphonage effect, which causes back-siphonage; 

29) horizontal sewer means a sewer whose gradient relative to the vertical plane is greater 

than or equal to 45°; 

30) replaceable water pipe means a pipe that can be replaced and repaired without excessive 

work or without breaking any structures; 

31) placement of the water pipe or sewer within the building means a water pipe or sewer 

installed within or above a building’s foundation panel; 

32) placement of the water pipe or sewer in the ground means a water pipe or sewer installed 

in the ground below a building’s foundation panel or outside the foundation wall; 

33) plumbing fixtures mean devices intended to draw water, such as taps, mixers or the like; 
34) water system means the system for conveying household water and domestic hot water; 
35) water seal means a device that prevents sewer gases from escaping from a sewer; 
36) water point means a place where water is drawn and which is equipped with plumbing 

37) drainage appliances mean devices intended for sewerage, such as sinks, floor drains, toilet 

fixtures; 

pans or the like; 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
38)  sewerage  system  means  the  system  to remove  waste  water,  storm  water  or foundation 

drainage water; 

39) drainage point means a place of drainage that is equipped with a drainage appliance; 
40) gradient sewer means a sewerage system in which waste water, storm water and founda-

tion drainage water are removed by gravity; 

41) minimum gradient means the smallest permitted gradient of a gradient sewer at which the 

sewer operates in a self-cleaning manner; 

42)  back  check valve  means  a  valve  that permits  the  flow  of  water  in  a  water pipe  in  one 

direction only; 

43) overflow pipe means a pipe that prevents the device from overfilling. 

Section 3 

Design of a water and sewerage system of a building 

When designing a building, the principal designer, specialist designer and construction de-
signer shall each in accordance with their respective duties ensure that the building, in accord-
ance with its intended use, meets the requirements regarding the safety, healthiness, operational 
reliability, durability and energy efficiency of the water and sewerage systems. The design plan 
shall  indicate the  components,  products  and  materials  to  be  used  in  the  water  and  sewerage 
systems. 

Chapter 2 

Water system of a building 

Section 4 

Water quality 

The  quality  of  the  water  intended  to  be  conveyed  to  the  building’s  water  system  shall  be 
known to the specialist designer for the technical design of the system and for corrosion pre-
vention.  Only water that meets the quality requirements set on household water may be con-
veyed to the water system.  

Water drawn from the water system may not endanger health and it may not contain taste or 

odour nuisance. 

Section 5 

Protection against health risks and other harm 

Water systems connected to the network of a water supply plant may not be in direct contact 
with any water system, sewerage system or special water system that obtains its water from 
some other water source.  

Products to be used in the water system shall be suitable for conveying household water. 
The water system shall be designed to prevent the back-siphoning of water and the risk of 
contamination caused by the penetration of liquids and gases. If the water pipe is located in 
contaminated ground or there is a risk of contamination, diffusion-tight pipe material shall be 
used. 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 6 

Water temperature 

The cold water pipe shall be designed and installed so that the temperature in the cold water 
system may not exceed 20 degrees Celsius. After a period of non-use of at least eight hours, the 
water temperature may not exceed 24 degrees Celsius.  

The water temperature of the water in the hot water system shall be at least 55 degrees Celsius 
and available from the hot water plumbing fixture within 20 seconds. The temperature of the 
water available from the hot water system may not exceed 65 degrees Celsius.  

The water system shall be designed so as to prevent detrimental cross-flow of water from the 

hot water pipe to the cold water pipe or vice versa.  

Section 7 

Dimensioning of the water system 

The water system shall withstand internal excess pressure of at least 1 000 kilopascals.  
The plumbing fixtures shall provide a flow, which is steady in view to its intended use without 

annoying noise and detrimental pressure shocks.  

Section 8 

 Domestic hot water ring duct 

The domestic hot water ring duct of a new building may not have heat emitters or floor heating 

connected to it.  

In connection with repair and alteration work, the heat emitters connected to the domestic hot 
water ring duct may be replaced so that the heat emission capacity of the heat emitters to be 
installed does not exceed 200 Watts per room. Domestic hot water may, however, not be used 
for floor heating. 

Section 9 

Plumbing fixtures 

The plumbing fixtures shall be suitable for their intended use. The functions and directions of 
movement of the appliances for controlling water volume and temperature shall be safe. The 
structure of the control appliance of the plumbing fixture shall be such that its surface tempera-
ture does not arise above 40 degrees Celsius. 

Section 10 

Water meters 

The water meter of a property shall be located in a place where it is easy to install, read and 

service and where it cannot freeze.  

A building shall have apartment-specific water meters for measuring the cold and hot water 
entering the apartment so that the water consumption indicated by the meters can be used as 
basis for billing. The apartment-specific water meters shall be located in a place where they are 
easy to install, read and service. 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 11 

Connecting a fire-prevention water system to a building’s water system 

A fire-prevention water system may be connected to a building’s water system with the per-

mission of the water supply plant. 

The fire-prevention water system may not cause health-related or other detriment to the build-
ing’s water system or to its functioning. A fire-prevention water system that uses substances 
that are harmful to health may not be connected to the water system. 

The fire-prevention water system may not cause backflow into the building’s water system. 

Section 12 

Installation of a special water system 

In a special water system, water for technical use other than household water may only be 

conveyed if the equipment is separated from the household water system by an air gap. 

Each water point and network component of the special water system shall have a clear and 

permanent marking stating the quality and intended use of the water.  

Chapter 3 

Operational reliability of the water system 

Section 13 

Detectability of leaks 

The specialist designer shall design the water pipes and devices connected thereto to be in-
stalled to the building so that any leak is easily detectable and the water pipes and devices can 
be easily inspected, repaired and replaced.  The connector pipes in the wall structures shall be 
seamless. Lead-through holes for water pipes may not be made in the floor of a wet room.  

In order to detect water leaks, structural solutions that direct the leaked water in sight shall be 
used. Vertical service pipes shall be equipped with mechanical or structural leak detectors at 
each floor if the service pipes are not visible. 

Section 14 

Integrity of a water system 

The water system shall be leakproof. The integrity of the water system shall be ensured by 

using compatible products, components and materials.  

Section 15 

Prevention of freezing 

The water in the water system may not be allowed to freeze. Water pipes that are located in 
cold premises shall be thermally insulated. Water pipes to be installed in the ground shall be 
situated below the frost depth unless the freezing of the water pipes is prevented otherwise.  

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 16 

Supports and fasteners 

The supports and fastening points of water pipes shall be such that neither heat expansion nor 
forces generated by water flow cause the pipes to shift, loosen, break or make disturbing noises. 
The supports and products used in fastening shall be corrosion resistant in their environment of 
use. 

Section 17 

Shut-off and safety devices of a water system 

A water system shall incorporate shut-off options to ensure that the equipment is easy to use, 

service and repair.  

The shut-off valves shall be located: 
1) at each house; 
2) at each apartment; 
3) in vertical service pipes; 
4) on both sides of devices installed in the service pipes; 
5) before a device or fixture that is connected to the connector pipe;  
6) on both sides of the water meters. 
The domestic hot water equipment shall have a safety device to prevent excess pressure. 

Section 18 

Measurement and regulating devices of a water system 

A water system shall have a measurement and regulating option to control the principal oper-

ating values. The water system shall incorporate: 

1) a pressure gauge; 
2) thermometers in the water pipe of mixed domestic hot water from the water heater and in 

the domestic hot water ring duct to measure the temperature of return water; 

3) throttling valves. 

Section 19 

Changing the water pipe pressure 

The specialist designer shall draw up a pressure loss calculation for the water system.  
If the water pressure in the service pipe exceeds 500 kilopascals, a reducing valve shall be 

used to reduce the pressure to the level required by the design of the water system.   

If the pressure level is so low that the water system does not provide the discharge flow re-
quired by its design, water pressure booster equipment shall be used. The booster equipment 
shall be fitted with regulating devices to control the outlet pressure so that no disturbing pressure 
fluctuations or noises are generated as well as with safety fittings to prevent excessively high 
overpressure.  

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 4 

Water system commissioning measurements 

Section 20 

Establishing the integrity of the water system 

The specialist supervisor shall ensure that the integrity of the water system has been tested 
before commissioning a building. The integrity of the water system shall be ensured with pres-
sure testing using water. The test shall be carried out so that the water pipes and their joints are 
uninsulated and easily visible.  

The person in charge of the construction phase shall make an entry in the construction inspec-

tion document regarding the establishment of integrity of the water system. 

Section 21 

Water system flushing 

The specialist  supervisor  shall  ensure that  the  water pipe  equipment  is  flushed prior  to its 
commissioning. The flushing shall be carried out with household water to remove any dirt and 
debris from the pipe network.  

The person in charge of the construction phase shall make an entry in the construction inspec-

tion document of the flushing. 

Section 22 

Cleansing and disinfection of the water system 

If there is reason to suspect that the water system has been exposed to the effects of pathogenic 
micro-organisms or other substances that are hazardous or harmful to health, the specialist su-
pervisor shall ensure that the equipment is cleansed and disinfected prior to commissioning. 

The person in charge of the construction phase shall make the necessary entries in the con-

struction inspection document of the cleansing measures. 

Measurement and regulation of water system pressure and flow for plumbing fixtures 

Section 23 

The specialist supervisor shall ensure that the water system pressure and the flow for plumbing 
fixtures are measured, regulated and established to comply with the plans prior to commission-
ing.  

The person in charge of the construction phase shall make an entry in the construction inspec-

tion document stating that the measurement and regulation work complies with the plans. 

Section 24 

Regulation of flow in the domestic hot water ring duct 

The specialist supervisor shall ensure that the flow rate of the ring duct is measured and reg-

ulated prior to commissioning. 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The person in charge of the construction phase shall make an entry in the construction inspec-

tion document of the regulation of the flow. 

Chapter 5 

Waste water system of a building 

Section 25 

Removal of waste water 

The waste water system of a building may not cause health hazards, odour nuisance, sewer 

overflows, noise or environmental harm.  

Waste water shall be conveyed to the sewer of the water supply plant or for purification prop-

erty-specifically or to a cesspit. 

The size of the sewer pipe may not diminish in the flow direction. 

Section 26 

Arrangement of drainage 

A water point shall incorporate a drainage point that is connected to the sewer via a drainage 
fixture. No drainage point is required for irrigation posts, fire posts, emergency sprinklers or 
individual refrigeration or drinking appliance. 

No more than two drainage wells may be connected to a floor drain and they may be located 
at a maximum distance of three meters from the floor drain. In the construction of a new building 
as well as in repair and alteration work corresponding to the construction of a new building, the 
premises to be fitted with a floor drain shall be: 

1. showers and bathrooms as well as wash rooms in connection with saunas; 
2. laundry room; 
3. heat distribution room; 
4. ventilation unit room; 
5. toilet facility intended for public use;  
6. technical utility room with a possibility to water damage; 
7. car wash facility; 
8. special facilities cleansed by water rinsing. 

Section 27 

Waste water pumping station 

If waste water cannot be conveyed from the drainage points of a building with gravity unload-
ing via a gradient sewer, the waste water shall be pumped. The pumping station shall be water-
tight and resistant to earth pressure and it may not cause odour problem. The waste water pump-
ing station shall be ventilated. 

The pumping station shall be equipped with a malfunction detector. The pumping station shall 
be located in a place where it can be easily inspected and serviced. The waste water may not be 
allowed to flow back to the pumping station. 

If a drainage point is located below the height of backwater, the waste water must be pumped. 
In repair and alteration work, a drainage point located below the height of backwater may be 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fitted with a backwater valve instead of pumping with the exception of waters from a water 
toilet. 

Section 28 

Prevention of spread of sewer odours 

The sewerage system may not cause odour nuisance. 
A drainage point shall be equipped with a cleansable water seal. 
Sewers shall be connected to a stack vent that extends above the roofing of a building. A stack 

vent located in cold premises shall be thermally insulated.  

Section 29 

Drainage of overflow and discharge waters 

Overflow and discharge waters from water tanks and discharge water from washing machines 

and dishwashers may not be allowed to flow from the drain back to the appliances.  

Chapter 6 

Operational reliability of the waste water system 

Section 30 

Supporting and fixing sewers to structures 

Sewers shall be supported and fixed to structures so that mechanical forces and heat expansion 
do not cause dents or detrimental changes in the sewers. A sewer shall be anchored if the forces 
generated by the flow of the waste water are so strong that the sewer will not otherwise remain 
in place without causing problems. The supports and products used in fastening- shall be corro-
sion resistant in their environment of use.  

The supports of a sewer that is cured-in-place by coating or lining shall be of such condition 

that they withstand the stress generated by the use of the repaired sewer.  

Section 31 

Observance of conditions in the location of a sewer 

A sewer installed in the ground shall withstand the load imposed by soil, soil corrosion as 
well as subsidence of soil. Leakage from a pressure sewer located in a groundwater zone shall 
be detectable.   

Water pipes and sewers installed in the ground shall be identifiable and they shall be located 

separate from one another. 

The sewerage system may not be allowed to freeze. 

Section 32 

Integrity of the sewerage system 

The sewerage system shall be leakproof. The materials and fittings shall be compatible. 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The person in charge of the construction phase shall make an entry in the construction inspec-

tion document regarding the establishment of integrity of the sewerage system. 

Section 33 

Separators of the sewerage system 

If sand, sludge, grease, petrol, oil or other detrimental physical or chemical substances may 
end up in the sewerage system or network or in the environment, the sewerage system shall be 
equipped with a separator or treatment device. 

The separator devices shall be located so that they can be serviced and emptied easily and 

without causing problems. 

The oil and grease separators shall be equipped with a filling alarm. The sewer pipe located 

behind the separator shall provide a sampling possibility. 

Section 34 

 Cleanouts of waste water sewers 

The sewerage system shall be equipped with cleanouts that are easy to handle and lockable in 
both horizontal and vertical sewers. The cleanouts shall be located so that the entire pipeline 
may be cleansed.  

Chapter 7 

Storm water system 

Section 35  

Design of the storm water system 

The principal designer and specialist designer shall each in accordance with their respective 
duties design the storm water system so that the first solution for the removal of storm water is 
its delaying and infiltration within the property. If storm water infiltration is not possible due to 
the characteristics of the soil, the property shall have a storm water system through which the 
storm water flows into a ditch, a body of water or the municipal storm water sewer.  Waste 
water may not be conveyed to the storm water system.   

The design of the storm water system shall be such that the flow, equivalent to the design 

rainfall which is conveyed into the sewer, does not cause the sewer to overflow. 

Section 36 

Location of the storm water system 

Storm water sewers within a building may not generate noise. A storm water sewer installed 
in the ground shall withstand, without sustaining damage or loss of function, the effects of soil 
pressure, stress and soil corrosion as well as any subsidence of its location. The storm water 
system shall be cleansable via manholes and fittings. 

The storm water sewer may not be allowed to freeze. 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 37  

Integrity and operational reliability of storm water sewers within a building 

The specialist supervisor shall ensure that the integrity of the storm water sewers within the 
building is checked. The storm water sewer shall be fixed to structures so that no harmful dent 
can arise thereon and so that a possible heat expansion will not cause problems as well as so 
that the forces generated by the flow of storm water cannot result in harmful movement of the 
pipes. The storm water sewers within the building shall be equipped with condensation insula-
tion.  

The person in charge of the construction phase shall make an entry in the construction inspec-
tion  document  regarding the  establishment  of integrity  of the  storm  water sewers  within the 
building. 

Section 38 

Removal of the foundation drainage water of a building 

Drains shall convey foundation drainage water via drainage wells to a collection well. The 
foundation drainage water shall flow away from the property in such a way that it does not cause 
problems to the waste water and storm water systems. Depending on the sewerage system of 
the area, the foundation drainage waters of a building may flow into an open ditch, a water body, 
the municipal storm water sewer or they may infiltrate into the ground. Waste and storm waters 
may not be conveyed into the foundation drainage water sewers. 

Chapter 8 

Entry into force and transitional provisions 

Section 39 

Entry into force 

This Decree enters into force on 1 January 2018. 
Upon the entry into force of this Decree, pending projects shall be subject to the rules valid at 

the time of entry into force of this Decree. 

Helsinki, 22 December 2017 

Kimmo Tiilikainen, Minister of the Environment, Energy and Housing 

Kaisa Kauko, Senior Engineer 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
