MATERIALS AND WORkMANSHIP

Any building work which is subject to the 

requirements imposed by Schedule 1 to the 

Building Regulations shall be carried out in 

accordance with regulation 7.


(1)  The  ground  to  be  covered  by  the  building  shall  be 

reasonably  free  from  any  material  that  might  damage  the 

building  or  affect  its  stability,  including  vegetable  matter, 

topsoil and preexisting foundations.


(2)  Reasonable precautions shall be taken to avoid danger 

to  health  and  safety  caused  by  contaminants  on  or  in  the 

ground covered, or to be covered by the building and any land 

associated with the building.


(3)  Adequate  subsoil  drainage  shall  be  provided  if  it  is 

needed to avoid:

(a)  the passage of ground moisture to the interior of 

the building;

(b)  damage to the building, including damage through 

the transport of waterborne contaminants to the foundations of 

the building.


(4)  For  the  purpose  of  this  requirement,  contaminant  

means  any  substance  which  is  or  may  become  harmful  to 

persons or buildings including substances which are corrosive, 

explosive, flammable, radioactive or toxic.


The walls, floors and roof of the building shall adequately 

protect  the  building  and  people  who  use  the  building  from 

harmful effects caused by:

(a)  ground moisture;

(b)  precipitation including winddriven spray;

(c)  interstitial and surface condensation; and

(d)  spillage of water from or associated with sanitary 

fittings or fixed appliances.


Approved Document C Site preparation and resistance to contaminants and moisture 

SITE PREPARATION AND RESISTANCE TO 

CONTAMINANTS AND MOISTURE

MATERIAL CHANGE OF USE

Requirement C1 (2), which addresses resistance 

to contaminants, is now added to the requirements 

in Regulation 6 of the Building Regulations 2010 

which should be complied with when there are 

certain material changes of use of buildings.


Regulation 6 sets out which parts of Schedule 1 

should be complied with when there is a material 

change of use of the building as defined in 

Regulation 5.


Interpretation (Regulation 2)

Room for residential purposes means a room, 

or suite of rooms, which is not a dwellinghouse 

or a flat and which is used by one or more 

persons to live and sleep and includes a room in 

a hostel, a hotel, a boarding house, a hall of 

residence or a residential home, but does not 

include a a room in a hospital, or other similar 

establishment, used for patient accommodation.


Meaning of material change of use 

(Regulation 5)

For the purposes of paragraph 8 (1)(e) of 

Schedule 1 to the Act and for the purposes of 

these Regulations, there is a material change of 

use where there is a change in the purposes for 

which or the circumstances in which a building is 

used, so that after the change:

a.  the building is used as a dwelling, where 

previously it was not;

b.  the building contains a flat, where previously 

it did not;

c.  the building is used as a hotel or boarding 

house, where previously it was not;

d.  the building is used as an institution, where 

previously it was not;

e.  the building is used as a public building, 

where previously it was not;

the building is not a building described 

in Classes 1 to 6 in Schedule 2, where 

previously it was;

g.  the building, which contains at least one 

dwelling, contains a greater or lesser number 

of dwellings than it did previously;

h.  the building contains a room for residential 

purposes, where previously it did not;

the building, which contains at least one room 

for residential purposes, contains a greater 

or lesser number of such rooms than it did 

previously; or

the building is used as a shop, where 

previously it was not.


Requirements relating to material 

change of use (Regulation 6)

of the whole of a building, such work, if any, shall 

be carried out as is necessary to ensure that the 

building complies with the applicable requirements 

of the following paragraphs of Schedule 1:

Where there is a material change of use 

a.  in all cases,

B1  (means of warning and escape)

B2  (internal fire spread  linings)

B3  (internal fire spread  structure)

B4  (2) (external fire spread  roofs)

B5  (access and facilities for the fire service)

C2 (2) (interstitial and surface condensation)

F1  (ventilation)

G1 (cold water supply)

G3 (1) to (3) (hot water supply and systems)

G4 (sanitary conveniences)

G5 (bathrooms)

G6 (kitchens and good preparation areas)

H1 (foul water drainage)

H6 (solid waste storage)

J1 to J4 (combustion appliances)

L1  (conservation of fuel and power  

dwellings);

P1  (electrical safety);

b.  in the case of a material change of use 

described in Regulations 5(c), (d), (e) or (f), 

A1 to A3 (structure);

Site preparation and resistance to contaminants and moisture Approved Document C 

SITE PREPARATION AND RESISTANCE TO 

CONTAMINANTS AND MOISTURE 

Historic buildings

Material change of use or alterations to existing 

buildings may include work on historic buildings.


In such work, the aim should be to improve 

resistance to contaminants and moisture where 

it is practically possible, always provided that 

the work does not prejudice the character of the 

historic building, or increase the risk of longterm 

deterioration to the building fabric or fittings.


Particular issues relating to work in historic 

buildings that warrant sympathetic treatment and 

where advice from others could therefore be 

beneficial include the following:

a.  avoiding excessively intrusive gas protective 

measures;

b.  ensuring that moisture ingress to the roof 

structure is limited and the roof can breathe3,4.


Any new loft insulation should be 

kept sufficiently clear of the eaves so that any 

adventitious ventilation is not reduced.


c.  in the case of a building exceeding fifteen metres 

in height, B4 (1) (external fire spread  walls);

d.  in the case of a material change of use described 

in regulation 5(a), (b), (c), (d), (g), (h), (i) or, 

where the material charge provides new 

residential accommodation, (f), C1 (2) 

(resistance to contaminents);

e.  in the case of material change of use described 

in regulation 5(a), C2 (resistance to moisture);

in the case of a material change of use 

described in regulation 5(a), (b), (c), (g), (h) or 

(i), E1 to E3 (resistance to the passage of 

sound);

g.  in the case of a material change of use 

described in regulation 5(e), where the public 

building consists or contains a school, E4 

(acoustic conditions in schools);

h.  in the case of a material change of use 

described in Regulation 5(a) or (b), G2 (water 

efficiency) and G3(4) (hot water supply and 

systems: hot water supply to fixed baths);

in the case of a material change of use 

described in regulation 5(c), (d), (e) or (j), M1 

(access and use).


Where there is a material change of use of 

part only of a building, such work, if any, shall be 

carried out as is necessary to ensure that:

a.  that part complies in all cases with any 

applicable requirement referred to in 

paragraph (1) (a);

b.  in a case to which subparagraphs (b),  

(e), (f), (g) or (h) of paragraph (1) apply, that 

part complies with the requirements referred 

to in the relevant subparagraph; and

c.  in the case to which subparagraph (c) of 

paragraph (1) applies, the whole building 

complies with the requirement referred to 

in that subparagraph; and

d.  in the case to which subparagraph (i) of 

paragraph (1) applies:

that part and any sanitary appliances 

provided in or in connection with that part 

comply with the requirements referred to 

in that subparagraph; and

ii.


Provides guidance on the principles that should be applied 

when proposing work on historic buildings.


If flagged floors 

are taken up the stones should be indexed and 

their layout recorded to facilitate relaying when 

work is completed.


This means that action may need to be 

taken to mitigate the effects of contaminants 

within the land associated with the building as well 

as protecting the building and persons in and 

about the building.


Users of this document should be 

aware that there may be further provisions for 

dealing with contaminants contained in planning 

guidance or legislation made under the regime 

set out in Part IIA of the Environmental Protection 

Act 1990 which may be supplementary to the 

requirements of the Building Regulations.


0.10  Redevelopment is often the most 

effective means of remediating land affected by 

contaminants.


Authorities that should be notified 

about contamination

0.11  Other regulatory authorities may have an 

interest in land affected by contamination.


The most likely 

situations are:

 TheEnvironmentalHealthdepartmentof 

the district council should be informed if 

contaminants are found on a site where the 

presence of contamination has not been 

formally recognised through the planning 

process, if it is found that contaminants 

from the site are affecting other land or if 

contaminants are reaching the site from 

neighbouring land.


Asredevelopmentisthemostfavoured

means of dealing with land affected by 

contaminants, all land quality issues should 

be set out in documents in support of 

planning approval sent to the local planning 

authority.


The local Environment Agency office 

should be contacted to identify if there are 

any relevant issues.


The risks should be assessed  

and the working procedures should be in 

accordance with the requirements of the 

Construction (Design and Management) 

Regulations 2007.


Any part of the external envelope of a 

building that is at an angle of less than 70 to 

the horizontal.


The main investigation should be preceded 

by (b) and (c) above.


1.3   Where the site is potentially affected by 

contaminants, a combined geotechnical and 

geoenvironmental investigation should be 

considered.


Vegetable matter such as turf and roots 

UNSUITABLE MATERIAL

should be removed from the ground to be covered 

by the building at least to a depth to prevent later 

growth.


1.5   Where mature trees are present on sites 

with shrinkable clays (see Diagram 1 and Table 1), 

the potential damage arising from ground heave 

to services and floor slabs and oversite concrete 

should be assessed.


Reference should be made 

to BRE Digest 29822.


Where soils and vegetation 

type would require significant quantities of soil 

to be removed, reference should be made to  

BRE Digests 24023 and 24124, and to the FBE 

(Foundation for the Built Environment) report25.


Site preparation and resistance to contaminants and moisture Approved Document CCLEARANCE OR TREATMENT OF UNSUITABLE MATERIAL 

Diagram 1   Distribution of shrinkable clays and principal sulphate/sulphide bearing 

strata in England and Wales

1.6   Building services such as below ground 

drainage should be sufficiently robust or flexible 

to accommodate the presence of any tree roots.


Joints should be made so that roots will not 

penetrate them.


Where roots could pose a hazard 

to building services, consideration should be 

given to their removal.


1.7   On sites previously used for buildings, 

consideration should be given to the presence of 

existing foundations, services, buried tanks and 

any other infrastructure that could endanger 

persons in and about the building and any land 

associated with the building.


1.8   Where the site contains fill or made 

ground, consideration should be given to its 

compressibility and its potential for collapse on 

wetting, and to appropriate remedial measures 

to prevent damaging differential settlement.


Site preparation and resistance to contaminants and moisture Approved Document CRESISTANCE TO CONTAMINANTS 

Diagram 2   Example of a conceptual model for a site showing sourcepathway 

receptor

SOLID AND LIQUID CONTAMINANTS

Risk assessment

General concepts

To ensure safe development of land 

affected by contaminants the principles of risk 

assessment (as set out in paragraph 2.8 below) 

should be followed.


The general approach is 

founded on the concept of the sourcepathway

receptor relationship, or pollutant linkage, where 

source refers to contaminants in or on the ground.


For each tier, the model procedures 

for the management of land contamination (CLR 

1143) describes the stages of risk assessment 

that should be followed for identifying risks and 

making judgements about the 

consequences of land affected by contamination 

when developing a site.


Those parts of 

the land associated with the building that include 

the building itself, gardens and other places on 

the site that are accessible to users of the 

building and those in and about the building 

should be remediated to the requirements of 

the Building Regulations.


2.12  The Planning Authority should be informed 

prior to any intrusive investigations or if any 

substance is found which is at variance with any 

preliminary statements made about the nature of 

the site.


Risk estimation and evaluation

2.13  The detailed ground investigation must 

provide sufficient information for the confirmation 

of a conceptual model for the site, the risk 

assessment and the design and specification 

of any remedial works.


An investigation 

of the groundwater regime, levels and flows is 

essential for most sites since elevated groundwater 

levels could bring contaminants close to the 

surface both beneath the building and in any 

land associated with the building.


Expert advice 

should be sought.


2.14  During the development of land affected 

by contaminants the health and safety of both 

the public and workers should be considered46,47.


Approved Document C Site preparation and resistance to contaminants and moistureC 

RESISTANCE TO CONTAMINANTS

When building work is undertaken on sites 

affected by contaminants where control measures 

are already in place, care must be taken not to 

compromise these measures.


The choice of the most 

appropriate technique for a particular site is a 

highly sitespecific decision for which specialist 

advice should be sought.


Containment

2.17  Containment in its widest sense usually 

means encapsulation of material containing 

contaminants but in the context of building 

development containment is often taken to mean 

cover systems.


Imported fill and soil for cover systems 

2.20 

should be assessed at source to ensure that it is 

suitable for use48.


Imported 

fill should be assessed at source to ensure that 

there are no materials that will pose unacceptable 

risks to potential receptors.


2.24  Although the building and building 

materials are the main receptors with these 

hazards, ultimately there could be harm to health.


The Environment Agencys policy on 

building development on or near to landfills 

should be followed.


c.  On a site that has been subject to a use that 

could give rise to petrol, oil or solvent spillages.


Generally speaking, expert advice 

should be sought in these circumstances.


Consideration should be given to the design 

and layout of buildings to maximise the driving 

forces of natural ventilation.


Expert advice should be sought as the floor area 

of such buildings can be large and it is important 

to ensure that gas is adequately dispersed from 

beneath the floor.


Again, expert advice should be sought.


BR 211 provides guidance on basic radon 

protective measures appropriate in areas where 

3 to 10 of homes and full radon protective 

measures in areas where more than 10 of 

homes are predicted to have radon at or above 

the Radon Action Level of 200Bq/m3.


3.2  Where the water table can rise to within 

0.25m of the lowest floor of the building, or 

where surface water could enter or adversely 

affect the building, either the ground to be 

covered by the building should be drained by 

gravity, or other effective means of safeguarding 

the building should be taken.


If an active subsoil drain is cut during 

excavation and if it passes under the building it 

should be:

a.  relaid in pipes with sealed joints and have 

access points outside the building; or

b.  rerouted around the building; or

c.  rerun to another outfall (see Diagram 3).


3.4  Where there is a risk that groundwater 

beneath or around the building could adversely 

affect the stability and properties of the ground, 

consideration should be given to site drainage or 

other protection (see Section 4: Floors).


In heavy rainfall these systems 

surcharge and where preventative measures are 

not taken this could lead to increased risks of 

flooding within the property.


Where contaminants are present in the 

ground, consideration should be given to subsoil 

drainage to prevent the transportation of water

borne contaminants to the foundations or into 

the building or its services.


4.3  Consideration should be given to whether 

4.2(a) need apply to a building used wholly for:

a.  storing goods, provided that any persons 

who are habitually employed in the building 

are engaged only in taking in, caring for or 

taking out the goods; or

b.  a purpose such that the provision would not 

serve to increase protection to the health or 

safety of any persons habitually employed in 

the building.


Floors next to the ground and floors 

exposed from below should be designed and 

constructed so that their structural and thermal 

performance are not adversely affected by 

interstitial condensation.


Technical solution

4.7  Unless it is subjected to water pressure, 

which is likely in the case of buildings on very 

permeable strata such as chalk, limestone or 

gravel (in which case see Alternative approach, 

paragraph 4.12), a concrete ground supported 

floor may be built as follows (Diagram 4):

a.  well compacted hardcore bed, no greater 

than 600mm deep82, of clean, broken brick 

or similar inert material, free from materials 

including watersoluble sulphates in quantities 

which could damage the concrete (BRE 

Digest 27683; and

b.  concrete at least 100mm thick (but thicker 

if the structural design requires) to mix 

ST2 in BS 8500 or, if there is embedded 

reinforcement, to mix ST4 in BS 850084; and

c.  dampproof membrane above or below the 

concrete, and continuous with the damp

proof courses in walls, piers and the like.


If 

the ground could contain water soluble 

sulphates, or there is any risk that sulphate or 

other deleterious matter could contaminate 

the hardcore, the membrane should be 

placed at the base of the concrete slab85.


Site preparation and resistance to contaminants and moisture Approved Document CFLOORS 

Diagram 4   Ground supported floor  construction (see paragraph 4.7)

A membrane below the concrete could 

be formed with a sheet of polyethylene, which 

should be at least 300m thick (1200 gauge) with 

sealed joints and laid on a bed of material that 

will not damage the sheet.


In each case it should be protected by either a 

screed or a floor finish, unless the membrane is 

pitchmastic or similar material which will also 

serve as a floor finish.


If necessary the insulant should be resistant to 

contaminants in the ground.


Timber 

fillets laid in the concrete as a fixing for a floor 

finish should be treated with an effective 

preservative unless they are above the damp

proof membrane.


Ground covering either: 

i.  unreinforced concrete at least 100mm thick 

to mix ST 1 in BS 850089.


The concrete 

should be laid on a compacted hardcore 

bed of clean, broken brick or any other 

inert material free from materials including 

watersoluble sulphates in quantities 

which could damage the concrete; or

ii.


concrete, composed as described above, 

or inert fine aggregate, in either case at 

least 50mm thick laid on at least 300m 

(1200 gauge) polyethylene sheet with 

sealed joints, and itself laid on a bed of 

material which will not damage the sheet.


To prevent water collecting on the ground 

covering, either the top should be entirely above 

the highest level of the adjoining ground or, on 

sloping sites, consideration should be given to 

installing drainage on the outside of the upslope 

side of the building (see Diagram 6).


b.  Ventilated air space measuring at least 75mm 

from the ground covering to the underside of 

any wallplates and at least 150mm to the 

underside of the suspended timber floor (or 

insulation if provided).


The 

openings should be not less than either 

1,500mm2/m run of external wall or 500mm2/m2 

of floor area, whichever gives the greater 

Diagram 5   Suspended timber floor  construction (see paragraph 4.14(a) (i))

Diagram 6   Suspended floor  preventing water collection (see paragraph 4.14(a))

BS 85001:2002 Concrete.


In areas such as kitchens, utility rooms 

4.15 

and bathrooms where water may be spilled, any 

board used as a flooring, irrespective of the 

storey, should be moisture resistant.


In the case 

of chipboard it should be of one of the grades 

with improved moisture resistance specified in 

BS 7331:199091 or BS EN 312 Part 5:199792.


It 

should be laid, fixed and jointed in the manner 

recommended by the manufacturer.


To demonstrate 

compliance the identification marks should be 

facing upwards.


Any softwood boarding should 

be at least 20mm thick and from a durable 

species93 or treated with a suitable preservative.


Technical solution

4.18  One solution for a suspended concrete 

floor could be:

a.  in situ concrete at least 100mm thick (but 

thicker if the structural design requires) 

containing at least 300kg of cement for 

each m3 of concrete; or

b.  precast concrete construction with or without 

infilling slabs; and

c.  reinforcing steel protected by concrete cover 

of at least 40mm if the concrete is in situ and 

at least the thickness required for a moderate 

exposure if the concrete is precast.


This should measure 

at least 150mm clear from the ground to the 

underside of the floor (or insulation if provided).


The openings should be not less than 

either 1500mm2/m run of external wall or 

500mm2/m2 of floor area, whichever gives the 

greater opening area.


Any pipes needed to 

carry ventilating air should have a diameter of 

at least 100mm.


In localities where flooding is likely, 

4.20 

consideration may be given to including means 

of inspecting and clearing out the subfloor voids 

beneath suspended floors.


FLOORS (RESISTANCE TO 

SURFACE CONDENSATION 

AND MOULD GROWTH)

4.22  A floor will meet the requirement if:

a.  a ground floor is designed and constructed 

so that the thermal transmittance (Uvalue) 

does not exceed 0.7W/m2K at any point; and

b.  in the case of all floors, the junctions between 

elements are designed to Accredited 

Construction Details99, or follow the guidance 

of BRE IP17/01100.


5.3  Consideration should be given to whether 

provisions 5.2(a) and (d) need apply to a building 

used wholly for:

a.  storing goods, provided that any persons 

who are habitually employed in the building 

are engaged only in taking in, caring for or 

taking out the goods; or

b.  a purpose such that the provision would not 

serve to increase protection to the health or 

safety of any persons habitually employed in 

the building.


The damp 

proof course should be continuous with any 

dampproof membrane in the floors; and

b.  if the wall is an external wall, the dampproof 

course should be at least 150mm above the 

level of the adjoining ground (see Diagram 8), 

unless the design is such that a part of the 

building will protect the wall; and

c.  if the wall is an external cavity wall, (see 

Diagram 9a) the cavity should be taken 

down at least 225mm below the level of the 

lowest dampproof course, or a dampproof 

tray should be provided so as to prevent 

precipitation passing into the inner leaf (see 

Diagram 9b), with weep holes every 900mm 

to assist in the transfer of moisture through 

the external leaf.


above an opening, stop ends and at 

least two weep holes should be provided.


A solid external wall in conditions of very 

Technical solution

severe exposure should be protected by external 

impervious cladding, but in conditions of severe 

exposure may be built as follows:

a.  brickwork or stonework at least 328mm 

thick, dense aggregate concrete blockwork 

at least 250mm thick, or lightweight aggregate 

or aerated autoclaved concrete blockwork at 

least 215mm thick; and

b.  rendering: the exposed face of the bricks 

or blocks should be rendered or be given no 

less protection.


Rendering should be in two 

coats with a total thickness of at least 20mm 

and should have a scraped or textured finish.


The strength of the mortar should be compatible 

with the strength of the bricks or blocks.


The 

joints, if the wall is to be rendered, should be 

raked out to a depth of at least 10mm.


The 

rendering mix should be one part of cement, 

one part of lime and six parts of well graded 

sharp sand (nominal mix 1:1:6) unless the 

blocks are of dense concrete aggregate, 

in which case the mix may be 1:0.5:4.


Premixed and proprietary renders should be 

used in accordance with the manufacturers 

instructions;

Diagram 10    Protection of wall head 

from precipitation  

(see paragraph 5.9(c))

c.  protection should be provided where the top 

of walls, etc.


Unless the protection and 

joints will be a complete barrier to moisture, a 

dampproof course should also be provided;

d.  dampproof courses, cavity trays and 

closers should be provided and designed to 

ensure that water drains outwards:

i.  where the downward flow will be 

interrupted by an obstruction, such as 

some types of lintel; and

ii.


Where 

it is on the inside a cavity should be provided to 

give a break in the path for moisture and where it 

is on the outside it should provide some resistance 

to the ingress of moisture to ensure the wall 

remains relatively dry (see Diagram 11).


Technical solution

5.13  The construction of a cavity external wall 

could include:

a.  outer leaf masonry (bricks, blocks, stone or 

manufactured stone); and

b.  cavity at least 50mm wide.


Masonry units should be laid on a full bed 

of mortar with the cross joints substantially and 

continuously filled to ensure structural robustness 

and weather resistance.


Where a cavity is to be partially filled, the residual 

cavity should not be less than 50mm wide (see 

Diagram 11).


The suitability of a wall for installing insulation 

into the cavity should be determined either by 

reference to the map in Diagram 12 and the 

associated Table 4 or following the calculation 

or assessment procedure in current British or 

CEN standards.


When partial fill materials are 

to be used, the residual cavity should not be 

less than 50mm nominal; and

b.


A rigid (board or batt) thermal insulating material 

built into the wall should be the subject of 

current certification from an appropriate body 

or a European Technical Approval and the 

work should be carried out in accordance 

with the requirements of that document; or

c.  Other insulating materials inserted into the 

cavity after the wall has been constructed 

should have certification from an appropriate 

body and be installed in accordance with the 

appropriate installations code.


Alternatively the 

insulating material should be the subject of 

current certification from an appropriate body 

or a European Technical Approval and the 

work should be carried out in accordance 

with the requirements of that document by 

operatives either directly employed by the 

holder of the document or employed by an 

installer approved to operate under the 

document; or

d.  Ureaformaldehyde foam inserted into the 

cavity should be in accordance with BS 

5617:1985109 and be installed in accordance 

with BS 5618:1985110.


e.  When the cavity of an existing house is being 

filled, special attention should be given to 

the condition of the external leaf of the wall, 

e.g.


The possibility of this 

should be taken into account when designing a 

building.


5.24  Dry joints between cladding units should 

be designed so that precipitation will not pass 

through them, or the cladding should be designed 

so that precipitation which enters the joints will 

be directed towards the exposed face without 

it penetrating beyond the back of the cladding.


5.25  Each sheet, tile and section of cladding 

should be securely fixed.


Particular care should be taken with 

detailing and workmanship at the junctions 

between cladding and window and door openings 

as they are vulnerable to moisture ingress.


5.27  Where cladding is supported by timber 

components or is on the faade of a timber framed 

building, the space between the cladding and 

the building should be ventilated to ensure rapid 

drying of any water that penetrates the cladding.


5.30  Dampproof courses should be provided 

to direct moisture towards the outside:

a.  where the downward flow of moisture 

would be interrupted at an obstruction, 

e.g.


In areas of the country in driving rain 

5.32 

exposure zone 4 checked rebates should be 

used in all window and door reveals.


The frame 

should be set back behind the outer leaf of 

masonry, which should overlap it as shown in 

Diagram 13.


ExTERNAL WALLS (RESISTANCE 

TO SURFACE CONDENSATION 

AND MOULD GROWTH)

5.36  An external wall will meet the requirement if: 

a.  it is designed and constructed so that the 

thermal transmittance (Uvalue) does not 

exceed 0.7W/m2K at any point; and

b.  the junctions between elements and details 

of openings, such as doors and windows, 

are designed to Accredited Construction 

Details99, or follow the guidance of BRE 

IP17/01132.


6.7  Dry joints between roofing sheets should 

be designed so that precipitation will not pass 

through them, or the system should be designed 

so that precipitation which enters the joints will 

be drained away without penetrating beyond 

the back of the roofing system.


6.12  To avoid excessive moisture transfer to 

roof voids gaps and penetrations for pipes and 

electrical wiring should be filled and sealed; this 

is particularly important in areas of high humidity, 

e.g.


An effective 

draught seal should be provided to loft hatches 

to reduce inflow of warm air and moisture.


ROOFS (RESISTANCE TO 

SURFACE CONDENSATION 

AND MOULD GROWTH)

6.14  A roof will meet the requirement if:

a.  it is designed and constructed so that the 

thermal transmittance (Uvalue) does not 

exceed 0.35W/m2K at any point; and

b.  the junctions between elements and the 

details of openings, such as windows, 

are designed to Accredited Construction 

Details99, or follow the guidance of BRE 

IP17/01145 or MCRMA Paper 14146 

for profiled metal roofing.


