MATERIALS AND WORKMANSHIP

Any building work which is subject to the 

requirements imposed by Schedule 1 to the 

Building Regulations shall be carried out in 

accordance with regulation 7.


Appropriate safety codes should be 

followed including procedures for working in 

confined spaces.


(1)  An adequate system of drainage shall be provided to 

carry foul water from appliances within the building to one of 

the following, listed in order of priority:

Requirement H1 does not apply to the diversion of water which 

has  been  used  for  personal  washing  or  for  the  washing  of 

clothes, linen or other articles to collection systems for reuse.


(2)  In  this  Part  foul  water  means  waste  water  which 

comprises or includes:

(a)  waste  from  a  sanitary  convenience,  bidet  or 

appliance used for washing receptacles for foul waste; or

(b)  water which has been used for food preparation, 

cooking or washing.


The capacity of the system should be large 

a.  conveys the flow of foul water to a foul water 

outfall (a foul or combined sewer, a cesspool, 

septic tank or holding tank);

The capacity depends on the size and 

gradient of the pipes.


The pipe sizes quoted in this document are 

nominal sizes used as a numerical designation in 

convenient round numbers approximately equal 

to a manufacturers size.


Complex systems in larger 

buildings should be designed in accordance with 

BS EN 12056 (see paragraph 1.39).


Where WCs with major flush 

volumes less than 5 litres are used, consideration 

should be given to the increased risk of blockages.


Traps

All points of discharge into the system 

should be fitted with a trap (e.g.


1.5  Pressure fluctuation  To prevent the 

water seal from being broken by the pressures 

which can develop in the system the branch 

discharge pipes should be designed as described 

in paragraphs 1.7 to 1.25.


All other traps should be fitted 

directly after the appliance and should be 

removable or be fitted with a cleaning eye.


2  Where these appliances discharge directly to a gully the depth 

of seal may be reduced to not less than 38mm.


Traps used on appliances with flat bottom (trailing waste 

discharge) and discharging to a gully with a grating may have 

a reduced water seal of not less than 38mm.


Diagram 1    Direct connection of 

ground floor WC to a drain

Approved Document H Drainage and waste disposal 

SANITARY PIPEWORK

Diagram 2   Branch connection to stacks  crossflow prevention

1.10  A branch pipe should not discharge into a 

stack in a way which could cause crossflow into 

any other branch pipe.


1.11  A branch discharge pipe should not 

discharge into a stack lower than 450mm above 

the invert of the tail of the bend at the foot of the 

stack in single dwellings of up to 3 storeys (see 

Diagram 2).


The connection 

should be made using pipework of minimum 

diameter 22mm through a 75mm condensate 

trap.


If an additional trap is provided externally 

to the boiler to provide the 75mm seal, an air gap 

should be provided between the boiler and the trap.


If the connection is made to a branch pipe, 

the connection should be made downstream 

of any sink waste connection.


c.  All sanitary pipework receiving condensate 

should be made from materials resistant to 

a pH value of 6.5 and lower.


The installation 

should be in accordance with BS 6798.


1.15  Sizes of branch pipes  Pipes serving a 

single appliance should have at least the same 

diameter as the appliance trap (see Table 1).


If a pipe serves more than one appliance, and is 

unventilated, the diameter should be at least the 

size shown in Table 2.


1.16  Bends in branch pipes should be avoided 

if possible.


1.17  Junctions on branch pipes of about the 

same diameter should be made with a sweep 

of 25mm radius or at 45.


Connection of branch 

pipes of 75mm diameter or more to a stack of 

equal diameter should be made with a sweep 

of 50mm minimum radius or at 45.


1.19  Ventilation of branch pipes  separate 

ventilation will not be needed to prevent the 

water seals in traps from being lost by pressures 

which can develop in the system if the length 

and slope of the branch discharge pipes do not 

exceed those shown in Table 2 or Diagram 3.


2   May be reduced to 9mm on long drain runs where space is restricted, but only if more than one WC is connected.


4   Slab urinals longer than seven persons should have more than one outlet.


Diagram 3   Branch connections

Approved Document H Drainage and waste disposal 

3 storeys discharge stacks should be located 

inside the building.


Stacks serving 

urinals should be not less than 50mm, stacks 

serving closets with outlets less than 80mm 

should be not less than 75mm and stacks serving 

closets with outlets greater than 80mm should 

be not less than 100mm.


The internal diameter 

of the stack should be not less than that of the 

largest trap or branch discharge pipe.


For larger 

buildings the maximum flow should be checked.


Not more than 1 WC with outlet size 80mm.


1.29  Ventilation of discharge stacks  To 

prevent water seals in the traps from being lost 

by pressures which can develop in the system, 

discharge stacks should be ventilated.


Discharge 

stacks connected to drains liable to surcharging 

or near an intercepting trap require ventilating 

pipes of not less than 50mm diameter connected 

to the base of the stack above the likely flood level.


1.30  Stub stacks  A stub stack may be used 

if it connects into a ventilated discharge stack or 

into a ventilated drain not subject to surcharging 

and no connected water closet has a floor level 

more than 1.3m and no other branch into the 

stub stack has a centreline more than 2m to the 

centre line above the invert of the connection or 

drain (see Diagram 5).


SANITARY PIPEWORK

If the figures in Table 2 and Diagram 3 are 

1.20 

exceeded the branch pipe should be ventilated 

by a branch ventilating pipe to external air, to a 

ventilating stack (ventilated branch system) or 

internally by use of an air admittance valve.


1.22  Branch ventilating pipes  should be 

connected to the discharge pipe within 750mm 

of the trap and should connect to the ventilating 

stack or the stack vent, above the highest 

spillover level of the appliances served (see 

Diagram 4).


Diagram 4    Branch ventilation pipes

1.23  Branch ventilating pipes which run direct 

to outside air should finish at least 900mm above 

any opening into the building nearer than 3m 

(see Diagram 6 and paragraph 1.31).


1.24  Branch ventilating pipes to branch pipes 

serving one appliance should be at least 25mm 

diameter or where the branch is longer than 15m 

or has more than 5 bends, should be at least 32mm.


1.25  Rodding points should be provided to 

give access to any lengths of discharge pipe 

which cannot be reached by removing traps or 

appliances with internal traps (see paragraph 1.6).


The 

bend at the foot of the stack should have as large 

a radius as possible and at least 200mm at the 

centre line.


1.27  Offsets in the wet portion of a discharge 

stack should be avoided.


If they are unavoidable 

then in a building of not more than 3 storeys there 

should be no branch connection within 750mm 

of the offset.


In buildings over 

Drainage and waste disposal Approved Document H 

SANITARY PIPEWORK 

Diagram 5    Stub stack

1.31  Ventilating pipes open to outside air 

should finish at least 900mm above any opening 

into the building within 3m and should be finished 

with a wire cage or other perforated cover, fixed 

to the end of the ventilating pipe, which does not 

restrict the flow of air (see Diagram 6).


In areas 

where rodent control is a problem (see paragraph 

2.22) these should be metallic.


Diagram 6    Termination of ventilation 

stacks or ventilation part of 

discharge

1.32  Sizes of stack ventilation pipes  stack 

ventilation pipes (the dry part above the highest 

branch) may be reduced in size in one and two 

storey houses, but should be not less than 75mm.


Air admittance 

valves should be located in areas which have 

adequate ventilation, should be accessible for 

maintenance and should be removable to give 

access for clearance of blockages.


Where there is no open 

ventilation on a drainage system or through 

connected drains, alternative arrangements to 

relieve positive pressures should be considered.


1.34  Access for clearing blockages  rodding 

points should be provided in discharge stacks to 

give access to any lengths of pipe which cannot 

be reached from any other part of the system.


All 

pipes should be reasonably accessible for repair.


Rodding points in stacks should be above the 

spillover level of appliances.


Where 

necessary different metals should be separated 

by nonmetallic material to prevent electrolytic 

corrosion.


Care should be taken to ensure 

continuity of any electrical earth bonding 

requirements.


Pipes should be firmly supported 

without restricting thermal movement.


Workmanship should be in accordance with  

BS 8000 Workmanship on Building Sites Part 13: 

Code of practice for above ground drainage.


Air tightness

1.38  The pipes, fittings and joints should be 

capable of withstanding an air test of positive 

pressure of at least 38mm water gauge for at 

least 3 minutes.


Every trap should maintain a 

water seal of at least 25mm.


Outlets

Foul drainage should be connected to a 

public foul or combined sewer wherever this is 

reasonably practicable.


For small developments 

connection should be made to a public sewer 

where this is within 30m provided that the 

developer has the right to construct the drainage 

over any intervening private land.


Where levels 

do not permit drainage by gravity a pumping 

installation should be provided (see paragraphs 

2.36 to 2.39).


For developments 

comprising more than one curtilage, the developer 

may requisition a sewer from the sewerage 

undertaker who has powers to construct sewers 

over private land (see Appendix H1C, C.4).


The sewerage undertaker should be 

notified at least three weeks before it is intended 

to connect to the public sewer (see Appendix 

H1C, C.7).


The sewer 

should be in satisfactory condition and have 

sufficient capacity to take the additional flows.


2.7  Where none of these options is reasonably 

practicable, a wastewater treatment system or 

cesspool should be provided (see Approved 

Document H2).


For lowlying sites 

(where the ground level of the site or the level of 

a basement is below the ground level at the point 

where the drainage connects to the public sewer) 

care should be taken to ensure that the property 

is not at increased risk of flooding.


In all such 

cases the sewerage undertaker should be 

consulted to determine the extent and possible 

frequency of the likely surcharge.


For basements containing sanitary 

appliances, where the risk of flooding due to 

surcharge of the sewer is considered by the 

sewerage undertaker to be high, the drainage from 

the basement should be pumped (see paragraphs 

2.36 to 2.39).


Where the risk is considered to be 

low an antiflooding valve should be installed on 

the drainage from the basement.


not basements) 

where risk is considered low, sufficient protection 

for the building may be possible by provision of 

a gully outside the building at least 75mm below 

the floor level.


This should be positioned so that 

any flooding from the gully will not damage any 

buildings.


In higher risk areas an antiflooding 

valve should be provided, or the drainage system 

pumped (see paragraph 2.36 to 2.39).


2.11  Antiflooding valves should preferably be 

of the double valve type, and should be suitable 

for foul water and have a manual closure device.


A single valve should not normally 

serve more than one building.


Changes of direction and gradient 

should be minimised and as easy as practicable.


Access points should be provided only if 

blockages could not be cleared without them.


2.14  Connection of drains to other drains or 

private or public sewers, and of private sewers to 

public sewers, should be made obliquely, or in 

the direction of flow.


2.15  Connections should be made using 

prefabricated components.


Where holes are cut 

in pipes a drilling device should be used to avoid 

damaging the pipe.


2.16  Where connections made to existing 

drains or sewers involve removal of pipes and 

insertion of a junction, repair couplings should be 

used to ensure a watertight joint and the junction 

should be carefully packed to avoid differential 

settlement with adjacent pipes.


Approved Document H Drainage and waste disposal 

FOUL DRAINAGE

2.17  Sewers (serving more than one property) 

should be kept as far as is practicable away from 

the point on a building where a future extension 

is likely (e.g.


2.18  The system should be ventilated by a flow 

of air.


A ventilating pipe should be provided at 

or near the head of each main drain.


An open 

ventilating pipe (without an air admittance valve) 

should be provided on any drain fitted with an 

intercepting trap (particularly on a sealed system), 

and on any drain subject to surcharge.


2.19  Pipes should be laid to even gradients and 

any change of gradient should be combined with 

an access point (see paragraph 2.49).


Any bends should be limited to positions in or 

close to inspection chambers or manholes (see 

paragraph 2.49) and to the foot of discharge and 

ventilating stacks.


2.21  Drainage serving kitchens in commercial 

hot food premises should be fitted with a grease 

separator complying with BS EN 18251:2004 and 

designed in accordance with BS EN 18252:2002 

or other effective means of grease removal.


Special protection  

rodent control

2.22  Where the site has been previously 

developed the local authority should be consulted 

to determine whether any special measures are 

necessary for control of rodents.


Intercepting trap stoppers should be of the 

locking type that can be easily removed from 

the chamber surface and securely replaced 

after blockage clearance.


Solid plastic 

covers or metal gratings which can be fixed 

in place should be used to discourage rats 

from leaving the system.


Protection from settlement

2.23  A drain may run under a building if at least 

100mm of granular or other flexible filling is 

provided round the pipe.


2.24  At any points where pipes are built into 

a structure, including an inspection chamber, 

manhole, footing, ground beam or wall, suitable 

measures should be taken to prevent damage or 

misalignment.


This may be achieved by either:

a.  building in a length of pipe (as short as 

possible) with its joints as close as possible 

to the wall faces (within at most 150mm) and 

connected on each side of rocker pipes by a 

length of at most 600mm and flexible joints 

(see Diagram 7(a)); or

b.  forming an opening to give at least 50mm 

clearance all round the pipe and the opening 

masked with rigid sheet material to prevent 

ingress of fill or vermin.


2.25  A drain trench should not be excavated 

lower than the foundations of any building nearby 

(see Diagram 8) unless either:

a.  where the trench is within 1m of the 

foundation the trench is filled with concrete 

up to the lowest level of the foundation; or

b.  where the trench is further than 1m from the 

building, the trench is filled with concrete 

to a level below the lowest level for the 

building equal to the distance from the 

building, less 150mm.


Depth of pipe cover

2.27  The depth of cover will usually depend on 

the levels of the connections to the system, the 

gradients at which the pipes should be laid and 

the ground levels.


a drain serving more than 

one property) should normally have a minimum 

diameter of 100mm when serving no more than 

10 dwellings.


Sewers serving more than 10 

dwellings should normally have a minimum 

diameter of 150mm.


2.33  A drain carrying foul water should have an 

internal diameter of at least 75mm.


A drain carrying 

effluent from a WC or trade effluent should have 

an internal diameter of at least 100mm.


2.34  Table 6 shows the flattest gradients at 

which drains should be laid (depending on the 

flow and the appliances connected to them) 

and the capacity they will then have (see also 

paragraphs 0.10.3).


Pumping installations 

for use inside buildings should be designed in 

accordance with BS EN 120564.


2.39  Where foul water drainage from a building 

is to be pumped, the effluent receiving chamber 

should be sized to contain 24hour inflow to 

allow for disruption in service.


The minimum daily 

discharge of foul drainage should be taken as 

150 litres per head per day for domestic use.


For other types of building, the capacity of the 

receiving chamber should be based on the 

calculated daily demand of the water intake for 

the building.


Where only a proportion of the foul 

sewage is to be pumped, then the capacity 

should be based prorata.


In all pumped systems 

the controls should be so arranged to optimise 

pump operation.


Joints should be appropriate to 

the material of the pipes.


Different 

metals should be separated by nonmetallic 

materials to prevent electrolytic corrosion.


2.42  Rigid pipes  The types of bedding and 

backfilling which should be used for rigid pipes 

of standard strength laid in a trench of any width 

are shown in Diagram 10 and Tables 8 and 9.


The bedding and backfilling 

should be as shown in Diagram 10.


2.44  Where pipes have less than the minimum 

recommended cover in Table 8, 9 or 10, the pipes 

should, where necessary, be protected from 

damage by a reinforced concrete cover slab with a 

Diagram 10   Bedding for pipes

Approved Document H Drainage and waste disposalH1 

FOUL DRAINAGE

flexible filler and at least 75mm of granular material 

between the top of the pipe and the underside of 

the flexible filler below the slabs (see Diagram 11 

and paragraphs 2.28, 2.42 and 2.43).


2.45  Where it is necessary to backfill the trench 

with concrete in order to protect nearby foundations 

(see paragraph 2.25) movement joints formed 

with compressible board should be provided at 

each socket or sleeve joint face (see Diagram 12).


For drains and sewers less than 1.5m deep and there is a risk of excavation adjacent to the drain and depth, special calculation is necessary, see  

  BS EN 1295.


Drainage and waste disposal Approved Document H 

FOUL DRAINAGE 

Diagram 11    Protection for pipes 

Diagram 12    Joints for concrete  

laid at shallow depths  

(minimum sizes)

encased pipes 

(minimum sizes)

Clearance of blockages

2.46  Sufficient and suitable access points 

should be provided for clearing blockages from 

drain runs which cannot be reached by any 

other means.


2.47  The provisions described below are for 

normal methods of rodding (which need not be in 

the direction of flow) and not mechanical means 

of clearing.


2.48  Access points should be one of four types.


Tables 11 and 12 show the depth at which each 

type should be used and the recommended 

dimensions it should have.


The dimensions 

should be increased at junctions if they do not 

allow enough space for branches.


150 x 100  

225 x 100  

0.6 or less, 

except where  

situated in a  

chamber

150 x 100  

225 x 100  

150  

225  

150 x 100 1  

225 x 100 1  

Same size as 

access fitting 

Inspection chamber 

shallow  

deep  

0.6 or less  

1.2 or less  

 1.2  

225 x 100  

450 x 450  

450 x 450  

190 2  

450  

450  

Min.


clear space between ladder or steps and the opposite face of the shaft should be approximately 900mm.


any drain serving more than one property) should be 1200mm x 675mm rectangular  

or 1200mm diameter.


2.50  Access should be provided to long runs.


The distances between access points depend 

on the types of access used but should not be 

more than shown in Table 13 for drains up to and 

including 300mm.


2.51  Access points to sewers (serving more 

than one property) should be in places where 

they are accessible and apparent for use in an 

emergency.


A branch with a diameter 150mm should be 

set with the soffit level with that of the main drain.


Where the angle of the branch is more than 45 

a three quarter section branch should be used.


Channels and branches should be benched up 

at least to the top of the outgoing pipe and at a 

slope of 1 in 12.


The benching should be rounded 

at the channel with a radius of at least 25mm.


and 150 x 100  

large 225 x 100  

Inspection chamber  

shallow

Manhole and inspection  

chamber deep

Small 

Large 

To Junction 

To Inspection chamber 

To Manhole

90 2 

Notes:

1.


Small lightweight access 

covers should be secured (for example with 

screws) to deter unauthorised access (for example 

by children).


Workmanship should be in accordance with 

BS 8000 Workmanship on Building Sites Part 14: 

Code of practice for below ground drainage.


2.56  During construction, drains and sewers 

which are left open should be covered when 

work is not in progress to prevent entry by rats.


2.57  Any drain or sewer should be protected 

from damage by construction traffic and heavy 

machinery.


2.58  Where piling works are being carried out 

care should be taken to avoid damage to any 

drain or sewer.


The position of the drain or sewer 

should be established by survey.


Piling should not be 

carried out where the distance from the outside 

of the sewer to the outside of the pile is less than 

two times the diameter of the pile.


Testing and inspection

2.59  Water tightness  after laying, including 

any necessary concrete or other haunching or 

surrounding and backfilling, gravity drains and 

private sewers should be tested for water tightness 

using either an air test or a water test.


2.60  Air test  for pipes up to 300mm diameter, 

the pipe should be pressurised up to a pressure of 

110mm water gauge and held for approximately 

5 minutes prior to testing.


Following this the pipe 

should be able to hold an initial 100mm pressure 

with a maximum loss of head on a manometer 

of 25mm in a period of 7 minutes.


Approved Document H Drainage and waste disposal 

FOUL DRAINAGE

2.61  Water test  For pipes up to 300mm 

diameter the system should be filled with water 

up to a depth of 5m above the lowest invert in 

the test section and a minimum depth of 1m 

measured at the highest invert in the test section.


The losses per 

square metre of surface area should not exceed 

0.15 litres for test lengths with only pipelines or 

0.20 litres for test lengths including pipelines and 

manholes, or 0.40 litres for tests with only manholes 

and inspection chambers alone (i.e.


2.62  Connectivity  Where separate drainage 

systems are provided (see Approved Document 

H5), connections should be proven to ensure that 

they are connected to the correct system.


of trap   Depth of seal 

(mm)  

Sanitary towel macerator  

Food waste disposal unit 

(industrial type)  

Urinal stall  

(1 to 6 person position) 

Branch discharge pipes

(see paragraph 1.10)

A.5  A branch pipe should not discharge into 

a stack less than 750mm above the invert of the 

tail of the bend at the foot of the stack in a multi

storey building up to 5 storeys.


If the building has more than 5 storeys 

ground floor appliances, unless discharging to 

a gully or drain, should discharge into their own 

stack.


If the building has more than 20 storeys 

ground floor appliances, unless discharging to 

a gully or drain, and first floor appliances should 

discharge into their own stack.


A.8  Ventilation stacks serving buildings with 

not more than 10 storeys and containing only 

dwellings should be at least 32mm diameter (for 

all other buildings see paragraph 1.29).


Approved Document H Drainage and waste disposal 

ADDITIONAL GUIDANCE FOR LARGER BUILDINGS

Greywater recovery systems

A.10  Sanitary pipework and underground 

drainage used to collect greywater for recovery 

and reuse within the building should be designed 

and constructed in accordance with the guidance 

in this Approved Document.


A.11  All pipework carrying greywater for 

reuse should be clearly marked with the word 

GREYWATER in accordance with Water Regulations 

Advisory Scheme Information Guidance Note 

090205 Marking and Identification of Pipework 

for Reclaimed and Grey Water Systems.


of 

the Public Health Act 1961, as amended, local 

authorities have powers to repair or remove 

blockages on drains or private sewers which are 

not sufficiently maintained or kept in good repair 

or are stopped up, provided the cost does not 

exceed 250.


They must first give notice to the 

owner.


of drain) of the Building Act 1984, 

any person intending to repair, reconstruct or 

alter a drain must, except in an emergency, give 

24 hours notice to the local authority of their 

intention to carry out the works.


Where the works 

are carried out in an emergency they shall not 

cover over the work without giving such notice.


They must also give free access to the local 

authority to inspect the works.


They could also collapse causing subsidence.


B.11  Under Section 62 (Disconnection of drain) 

of the Building Act 1984, any person who carries 

out works which result in any part of a drain 

becoming permanently disused, they shall seal 

the drain at such points as the local authority 

may direct.


Repairs and alterations

B.15  Repairs, reconstruction and alterations to 

existing drains and sewers should be carried out 

to the same standards as new drains and sewers 

(see Approved Document H1 Section 2).


B.16  Where new pipework is connected to 

existing pipework, particular consideration 

should be given to the following points.


In order to prevent this 

disused drains or sewers should be disconnected 

from the sewer system as near as possible to the 

point of connection.


This should be done in a 

manner which does not damage any pipe which 

is still in use and ensures that the sewer system is 

water tight.


Where the connection was to a public sewer the 

sewerage undertaker should be consulted.


B.18  Drains or sewers less than 1.5m deep which 

are in open ground should as far as is practicable 

be removed.


Other pipes should be sealed at 

both ends and at any point of connection, and 

grout filled to ensure that rats cannot gain access.


The sewer should be in good condition and 

accessible.


Drains which could be used to 

drain other developments

C.10  Section 112 of the Water Industry Act 

1991 enables the sewerage undertaker to require 

that a drain or sewer be constructed in a different 

manner so that it may form part of the general 

system of drainage.


Approved Document H Drainage and waste disposal 

ADOPTION OF SEWERS AND CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWERS

Table C1    Characteristics that should be considered when designing or laying a 

shared drain/sewer so that it meets the basic requirements for adoption

a.  Sewers should be designed and constructed in accordance with the Protocol on Design 

Construction and Adoption of Sewers in England and Wales

b.  Sewers should be laid at an appropriate distance from buildings so as to avoid damage 

to the foundations

c.  The manholes and chambers, especially in private land, should be located so that they 

are, and continue to be, easily accessible manually or, if necessary, with maintenance 

equipment such as pipe jetters or miniexcavators.


Consult sewerage undertaker 

about access for plant

d.  The last access point on the house drain should be sized to allow man entry and should 

be located in an accessible position.


If 

these depths are not practicable, special protection measures such as a concrete slab 

should be provided

H12.27 and BS EN 12951

g.  Sizing and design of manholes and chambers should depend on the depth and on 

H12.48

whether man entry is required.


Manholes on or near highways or other roads need to 

be of robust construction

h.  Sewers should be laid in straight lines in both vertical and horizontal alignments

H12.19

j.


The first preference should be to provide separate foul and surface water sewerage 

systems.


Where combined or partially combined sewerage is unavoidable, the sizing 

and the design of that sewer should be enhanced in accordance with the current codes 

and design methodologies to make additional provisions to deal with the runoff

Requirement H5, H12.35 and H33.5.


(1)  Any septic tank and its form of secondary treatment, 

other wastewater treatment system or cesspool shall be so sited 

and constructed that:

(a)  it is not prejudicial to the health of any person;

(b)  it will not contaminate any watercourse, underground 

water or water supply;

(c)  there are adequate means of access for emptying 

and maintenance; and

(d)  where  relevant,  it  will  function  to  a  sufficient 

standard  for  the  protection  of  health  in  the  event  of  a 

power failure.


(2)  Any  septic  tank,  holding  tank  which  is  part  of  a 

wastewater treatment system or cesspool shall be:

(a)  of adequate capacity;

(b)  so  constructed  that  it  is  impermeable  to  liquids; 

(c)  adequately ventilated.


(3)  Where a foul water drainage system from a building 

discharges  to  a  septic  tank,  wastewater  treatment  system  or 

cesspool, a durable notice shall be affixed in a suitable place 

in  the  building  containing  information  on  any  continuing 

maintenance required to avoid risks to health.


Introduction to provisions

A wastewater treatment system may be 

a septic tank, together with a drainage field or 

other means of secondary treatment, or other 

wastewater treatment system.


This should be done before an application 

is made for Building Regulations approval as it 

may have a direct bearing on the type of system 

that may be installed.


Septic tanks with some form of secondary 

treatment will normally be the most economic 

means of treating wastewater from small 

developments (e.g.


1.24  Septic tanks should be provided with 

access for emptying and cleaning.


Access covers 

should be of durable quality having regard to the 

corrosive nature of the tank contents.


The access 

should be lockable or otherwise engineered to 

prevent personnel entry.


Siting

Marking

1.16  Septic tanks should be sited at least 

7m from any habitable parts of buildings, and 

preferably downslope.


1.17  Where they are to be emptied using a 

tanker, the septic tank should be sited within 30m 

of a vehicle access provided that the invert level 

of the septic tank is no more than 3m below the 

level of the vehicle access.


This distance may 

need to be reduced where the depth to the invert 

of the tank is more than 3m.


Design and construction

1.18  Septic tanks should have a capacity below 

the level of the inlet of at least 2,700 litres (2.7m) 

for up to 4 users.


The size should be increased 

by 180 litres for each additional user.


Brickwork should be of engineering bricks 

and be at least 220mm thick.


In situ concrete 

should be at least 150mm thick of C/25/P mix 

(see BS 5328).


Ventilation should be kept away 

from buildings.


Where the width of the tank does not 

exceed 1200mm the inlet should be via a dip 

pipe.


To minimise turbulence, provision should be 

made to limit the flow rate of the incoming foul 

water.


1.23  The inlet and outlet pipes of a septic tank 

should be provided with access for sampling 

and inspection (see Approved Document H1, 

paragraph 2.48).


1.25  A notice should be fixed within the building 

describing the necessary maintenance.


Siting

1.27  A drainage field or mound serving a 

wastewater treatment plant or septic tank should 

be located:

a.  at least 10m from any watercourse or 

permeable drain;

b.  at least 50m from the point of abstraction of 

any groundwater supply and not in any Zone 

1 groundwater protection zone;

c.  at least 15m from any building;

d.  sufficiently far from any other drainage fields, 

drainage mounds or soakaways so that the 

overall soakage capacity of the ground is not 

exceeded.


1.28  The disposal area should be downslope of 

groundwater sources.


1.29  No water supply pipes or underground 

services other than those required by the 

disposal system itself should be located within 

the disposal area.


1.30  No access roads, driveways or paved 

areas should be located within the disposal area.


1.32  A preliminary assessment should be 

carried out including consultation with the 

Environment Agency and local authority to 

determine the suitability of the site.


1.33  A trial hole should be dug to determine 

the position of the standing groundwater table.


The trial hole should be a minimum of 1m2 in area 

and 2m deep, or a minimum of 1.5m below the 

invert of the proposed drainage field pipework.


If the test is carried out in 

summer, the likely winter groundwater levels 

should be considered.


1.34  Percolation test method  A hole 

300mm square should be excavated to a depth 

300mm below the proposed invert level of the 

effluent distribution pipe.


Diagram 1   Drainage field

1.35  Fill the 300mm square section of the hole 

to a depth of at least 300mm with water and 

allow it to seep away overnight.


1.36  Next day, refill the test section with water 

to a depth of at least 300mm and observe the 

time, in seconds, for the water to seep away from 

75 full to 25 full level (i.e.


1.37  The test should be carried out at least 

three times with at least two trial holes.


The 

average figure from the tests should be taken.


Design and construction

1.39  Drainage fields or mounds (see Diagrams 

1 and 2) should be designed and constructed 

to ensure aerobic contact between the liquid 

effluent and the subsoil.


1.40  Drainage fields should be constructed 

using perforated pipe, laid in trenches of a 

uniform gradient which should be not steeper 

than 1:200.


1.41  Pipes should be laid on a 300mm layer of 

clean shingle or broken stone graded between 

20mm and 50mm.


Surface water runoff and uncontaminated seepage from the surrounding soil may be cut off by shallow interceptor drains and diverted away from 

the mound.


There must be no seepage of wastewater to such an interceptor drain.


Where the permeable soil is slow draining and overlaid on an impervious layer, the mound filter system should be constructed on a gently sloping site.


1.42  Trenches should be filled to a level 

50mm above the pipe and covered with a layer 

of geotextile to prevent the entry of silt.


The 

remainder of the trench can be filled with soil; 

the distribution pipes should be laid at a minimum 

depth of 500mm below the surface.


Drainage trenches should be from 300mm to 

900mm wide, with areas of undisturbed ground 

2m wide being maintained between parallel 

trenches (see Diagram 1).


1.43  An inspection chamber should be installed 

between the septic tank and the drainage field.


1.44  Drainage fields should be set out as a 

continuous loop fed from the inspection chamber 

(see Diagram 1).


To calculate the floor area of the 

drainage field (At in m), the following formula 

should be used:

At  p x Vp x 0.25

where p is the number of persons served by 

the tank, Vp is the percolation value (secs/mm) 

obtained as described in paragraphs 1.341.38.


This should be taken into consideration during 

the design stage.


Approved Document H Drainage and waste disposalH2 

GUIDANCE

Diagram 3   Typical horizontal flow reed bed treatment system

Diagram 4   Typical vertical flow reed bed treatment system

Drainage and waste disposal Approved Document HGUIDANCE 

1.51  Reed bed treatment systems should be 

designed and constructed in accordance with 

BRE Good Building Guide No.


Other forms of 

constructed wetland treatment system should be 

designed and constructed by specialists.


Marking

1.52  A notice should be fixed within the 

building describing the necessary maintenance.


Packaged treatment works

Siting

1.54  The discharge from the wastewater 

treatment plant should be sited at least 10m 

away from watercourses and any other buildings.


Design and construction

1.55  Packaged treatment works should be 

typetested in accordance with BS 7781 or 

otherwise tested by a notified body.


If the packaged treatment works requires 

1.56 

power to operate it should be able to adequately 

function without power for up to 6 hours or have 

an uninterruptable power supply.


Marking

1.57  A notice should be fixed within the 

building describing the necessary maintenance.


Maintenance is required insert frequency and 

should be carried out by the owner in accordance 

with the manufacturers instructions.


1.59  Cesspools should be sited at least 7m 

from any habitable parts of buildings and 

preferably downslope.


1.60  Cesspools should be sited within 30m of 

a vehicle access and at such levels that they can 

be emptied and cleaned without hazard to the 

building occupants or the contents being taken 

through a dwelling or place of work.


Design and construction

1.61  Cesspools should have a capacity below 

the level of the inlet of at least 18,000 litres (18m) 

for 2 users.


This size should be increased by 

6800 litres (6.8m) for each additional user.


1.64  Cesspools should be provided with 

access for emptying and cleaning.


Access covers 

should be of durable quality having regard to the 

corrosive nature of the tank contents.


The access 

should be lockable or otherwise engineered to 

prevent personnel entry.


Brickwork should be of engineering bricks and be 

at least 220mm thick.


The mortar should be a mix 

of 1:3 cementsand ratio.


In situ concrete should be 

at least 150mm thick of C/25/P mix (see BS 5328).


1.67  The inlet of a cesspool should be provided 

with access for inspection (see Approved 

Document H1 Section 2).


Marking

1.68  A notice should be fixed within the 

building describing the necessary maintenance.


The system should be 

emptied approximately every insert design 

emptying frequency by a licensed contractor 

and inspected fortnightly for overflow.


1.70  Greywater and rainwater tanks should:

a.  prevent leakage of the contents and ingress 

of subsoil water, and should be ventilated;

b.  have an antibackflow device on any overflow 

connected to a drain or sewer to prevent 

contamination of the stored greywater or 

rainwater in the event of surcharge in the 

drain or sewer;

c.  be provided with access for emptying and 

cleaning.


Access covers should be of durable 

quality having regard to the corrosive nature 

of the tank contents.


The access should be 

lockable or otherwise engineered to prevent 

personnel entry.


It should be noted that under this section 

action could be taken against a builder who 

had caused the problem, and not just against 

the owner.


Septic tanks

A.11  Septic tanks should be inspected monthly 

to check they are working correctly.


The effluent 

in the outlet from the tank should be freeflowing 

and clear.


A.13  The septic tank should be emptied at least 

once a year.


Drainage fields and mounds

A.15  The drainage field/mound should be 

checked on a monthly basis to ensure that it is 

not waterlogged and that the effluent is not 

backing up towards the septic tank.


Packaged treatment works

A.16  The outlet of the works should be 

inspected regularly.


The effluent should be free

flowing and clear.


Approved Document H Drainage and waste disposal 

MAINTENANCE OF WASTEWATER TREATMENT 

SYSTEMS AND CESSPOOLS

A.17  Maintenance will vary depending on the 

type of plant; regular maintenance and inspection 

should be carried out in accordance with the 

manufacturers instructions.


Cesspools

A.20  Cesspools should be inspected fortnightly 

for overflow and emptied as required.


If the cesspool does not fill within the 

estimated period, the tank should be checked 

for leakage.


(1)  Adequate provision shall be made for rainwater to be 

carried from the roof of the building.


(2)  Paved areas around the building shall be so constructed 

Requirement H3(2) applies only to paved areas:

as to be adequately drained.


(3)  Rainwater  from  a  system  provided  pursuant  to  sub

paragraphs (1) or (2) shall discharge to one of the following, 

listed in order of priority:

(a)  an  adequate  soakaway  or  some  other  adequate 

infiltration system; or, where that is not reasonably practicable,

(b)  a  watercourse;  or,  where  that  is  not  reasonably 

practicable,

(c)  a sewer.


Guidance

Performance

In the Secretary of States view the requirements 

of H3 will be met if:

a.  rainwater from roofs and paved areas is 

carried away from the surface either by a 

drainage system or by other means;

b.  a rainwater drainage system:

i.  carries the flow of rainwater from the roof 

to an outfall (a soakaway, a watercourse, 

a surface water or a combined sewer),

(a)  which  provide  access  to  the  building  pursuant 

to  requirement  M1  (access  and  use  of  buildings  other  than 

dwellings),  or  requirement  M2  (access  to  extensions  to 

buildings other than dwellings), or requirement M4(1), (2) or 

(3) (access to and use of dwellings);

(b)  which provide access to or from a place of storage 

pursuant to requirement H6(2) (solid waste storage); or

(c)  in  any  passage  giving  access  to  the  building, 

where this is intended to be used in common by the occupiers 

of one or more other buildings.


provided in accordance with requirement 

H6 to give access from the building to 

the place for storing refuse, and from the 

place of storage to the collection point 

(see Approved Document H6);

b.  which are yards or other forms of access 

intended to be used in common by more than 

one building.


The capacity of the drainage system 

should be large enough to carry the expected 

flow at any point in the system.


Section 1: Gutters and rainwater pipes

Design rainfall intensities

should be obtained from Diagram 1.


For eaves, gutters the rainfall intensity 

1.2  Where the design incorporates valley 

gutters, parapet gutters, siphonic or drainage 

systems from flat roofs, and where overtopping 

of these systems would have particularly high 

consequences such as water entering the 

building, wetting of insulation or other dampness 

the design should be carried out in accordance 

with BS EN 12056 (see paragraph 1.17).


Table 2 shows the largest effective area 

which should be drained into the gutter sizes 

which are most often used.


These sizes are for 

a gutter which is laid level, half round in section 

with a sharp edged outlet at only one end and 

where the distance from a stop end to the outlet 

is not more than 50 times the water depth.


The Table shows the smallest size of 

outlet which should be used with the gutter.


1.5  Where the outlet is not at the end, the 

gutter should be of the size appropriate to the 

larger of the areas draining into it.


Table 1   Calculation of drained area

Type of surface  

Effective design area

Flat roof  

plan area of relevant portion

Pitched roof at 30  

Pitched roof at 45  

Pitched roof at 60  

plan area of portion x 1.29 

plan area of portion x 1.50 

plan area of portion x 1.87

Pitched roof over 70  

or any wall

elevational area x 0.5 

Drainage and waste disposal Approved Document H 

GUTTERS AND RAINWATER PIPES 

Diagram 1   Rainfall intensities for design of gutter and rainfall pipes  

(litres per second per square metre)

1.6  Gutters should be laid with any fall 

towards the nearest outlet.


Where rainwater from a roof with an effective 

area greater than 25m discharges through a 

single downpipe onto a lower roof, a distributor 

pipe should be fitted to the shoe to ensure that 

the flow width at the receiving gutter is sufficient 

so that it does not overtop the gutter.


Approved Document H Drainage and waste disposalH3 

GUTTERS AND RAINWATER PIPES

1.10  The size of a rainwater pipe should be 

at least the size of the outlet from the gutter.


A 

down pipe which serves more than one gutter 

should have an area at least as large as the 

largest of the contributing outlets and should be 

of sufficient size to take the flow from the whole 

contributing area.


Overflow arrangements should be provided to 

prevent gutters from overtopping.


Where these 

are used, they should be designed taking into 

account the following:

a.  storage tanks should comply with requirement 

H2 (see Approved Document H2 paragraphs 

1.69 to 1.71);

b.  pipework, washouts and valves should be 

clearly identified on marker plates (see Water 

Regulations Advisory Scheme Information 

Guidance Note 090205 Marking and 

Identification of Pipework for Reclaimed 

and Grey Water Systems).


Materials for gutters, rainwater 

pipes and joints

1.16  The materials used should be of adequate 

strength and durability, and

a.  all gutter joints should remain water tight 

under working conditions.


Pipes inside a 

building should be capable of withstanding 

the air tightness test described in paragraph 

1.32 of Approved Document H1, and

b.  pipework in siphonic roof drainage systems 

should be able to resist to negative pressures 

in accordance with the design, and

c.  gutters and rainwater pipes should be firmly 

supported without restricting thermal 

movement, and

a.  the protection of the fabric of the building 

from ingress of water, caused by water 

splashing on the external walls;

d.  different metals should be separated by 

nonmetallic material to prevent electrolytic 

corrosion.


For 

the design of systems serving larger catchments, 

reference should be made to BS EN 7524 (see 

paragraph 2.19).


Where the levels would otherwise cause water to 

concentrate along the wall of a building, a reverse 

gradient should be created, for at least 500mm 

from the wall of the building, to divert the water 

away from the wall.


Drainage systems

2.14  Where it is not possible for surfaces to be 

freedraining, or to use pervious paving, impervious 

paving should be used with gullies or channels 

discharging to a drainage system.


2.15  Gullies should be provided at low points 

where water would otherwise pond.


Intermediate 

gullies should be provided at intervals to ensure 

that gullies are not overloaded and the depth of 

flow in channels is not excessive.


2.16  Gully gratings should be set approximately 

5mm below the level of the surrounding paved 

area in order to allow for settlement.


2.17  Provision should be made to prevent silt 

and grit entering the system, either by provision 

of gully pots of suitable size or by catchpits.


A gradient of at least 1 in 60 

is recommended.


The gradient across a path 

should not exceed 1 in 40.


Where ponding of rainfall is undesirable rainfall 

intensities should be obtained from Diagram 2.


For very high risk areas, where ponding 

would lead to flooding of buildings, the drainage 

should be designed in accordance with BS EN 

7524 (see paragraph 2.19).


Freedraining surfaces

of paving should be freedraining to a pervious 

area such as grassland, provided that:

Paths, driveways and other narrow areas 

a.  the water is not discharged adjacent 

to buildings where it could damage 

foundations; and

b.  the soakage capacity of the ground is 

not overloaded.


They should be considered for larger 

paved areas where it is not possible to drain 

the rainwater to an adjacent pervious area.


2.10  For steeply sloping surfaces, a check 

should be made to ensure that the water level 

can rise sufficiently in the granular storage layer 

to allow the storage capacity to be mobilised.


For the 

design of systems serving larger catchments, 

reference should be made to BS EN 7524 

(see paragraph 3.36).


3.4  Where other forms of outlet are not 

practicable, discharge should be made to a 

sewer.


Some private sewers (drains 

serving more than one building that have not 

been adopted by the sewerage undertaker) also 

carry both foul water and surface water.


3.9  Where low levels of surface flooding could 

cause flooding of buildings the rainfall intensities 

should be obtained from BS EN 7524 (see 

paragraph 3.36).


3.14  Drains should be at least 75mm diameter.


Surface water sewers (serving more than one 

building) should have a minimum size of 100mm.


3.15  75mm and 100mm rainwater drains should 

be laid at not less than 1:100.


150mm drains and 

sewers should be laid at gradients not less than 

1:150 and 225mm drains should be laid at gradients 

not less than 1:225.


Contaminated runoff

3.21  Where any materials which could cause 

pollution are stored or used, separate drainage 

systems should be provided.


This should include 

an appropriate form of separator or treatment 

system or the flow should be discharged into a 

system suitable for receiving polluted effluent.


3.22  On car parks, petrol filling stations or other 

areas where there is likely to be leakage or spillage 

of oil, drainage systems should be provided with 

oil interceptors (see Appendix H3A).


3.25 

Infiltration devices should not be built:

a.  within 5m of a building or road or in areas of 

unstable land (see Planning Policy Guidance 

Note 14 Annex 1);

b.  in ground where the water table reaches the 

bottom of the device at any time of the year;

c.  sufficiently far from any drainage fields, 

drainage mounds or other soakaways so that 

the overall soakage capacity of the ground is 

not exceeded and the effectiveness of any 

drainage field is not impaired (see Approved 

Document H2);

d.  where the presence of any contamination in 

the runoff could result in pollution of a 

groundwater source or resource.


3.26  Soakaways for areas less than 100m 

are generally formed from square or circular pits, 

filled with rubble or lined with dryjointed masonry 

or perforated ring units.


3.27  Soakaways should be designed to a return 

period of once in ten years.


The design should be 

carried out with storms of differing durations to 

determine the duration which gives the largest 

storage volume.


3.28  Percolation tests should be carried 

out to determine the capacity of the soil (see 

Approved Document H2 paragraphs 1.34 to 

1.38).


Where the test is carried out in accordance 

with Approved Document H2, the soil infiltration 

rate (f) is related to the value Vp derived from 

the test by the equation:

3.29  The storage volume should be calculated 

so that, over the duration the storm, it is sufficient 

to contain the difference between the inflow 

volume and the outflow volume.


A.3  Premises keeping petrol must be licensed 

under the Petroleum (Consolidation) Act 1928.


Technical guidance

For most paved areas around buildings or 

car parks where a separator is required, a bypass 

separator should be provided which has a nominal 

size (NSB) equal to 0.0018 times the contributing 

area.


In addition it should have a silt storage 

volume in litres equal to 100 times NSB.


These 

should have a nominal size (NS) equal to 0.018 

times the contributing area.


In addition it should 

have a silt storage volume in litres equal to 100 

times NS.


A.8  Separators discharging to infiltration 

devices or surface water sewers should be Class I.

A.9  Separators should be leak tight.


Adequate ventilation should be provided.


A.11  Separators should be maintained regularly 

to ensure their continued effectiveness.


Provision 

should be made for access for inspection and 

maintenance.


(1)  The  erection  or  extension  of  a  building  or  work 

involving the underpinning of a building shall be carried out 

in  a  way  that  is  not  detrimental  to  the  building  or  building 

extension or to the continued maintenance of the drain, sewer 

or disposal main.


(2)  In  this  paragraph  disposal  main  means  any  pipe, 

tunnel or conduit used for the conveyance of effluent to or from 

a sewage disposal works, which is not a public sewer.


(3)  In this paragraph and paragraph H5 map of sewers 

means any records kept by a sewerage undertaker under section 

199 of the Water Industry Act 1991 (a).


A satisfactory diversionary route should 

be available so that the drain or sewer could 

be reconstructed without affecting the building.


Where the drain or sewer is more than 

1.5m deep and the drain or sewer is accessible 

to mechanical excavators the alternative route 

should also have such access.


Special measures will not be needed if the 

invert of the drain or sewer is:

a.  above the level of the foundations; and

b.  above the groundwater level; and

c.  no more than 1m deep.


Maintaining access

1.3  Buildings or extensions should not be 

constructed over a manhole or inspection 

chamber or other access fitting on any sewer 

(serving more than one property).


Approved 

Document H1 Section 2, paragraph 2.53 provides 

that access points to sewers (serving more than 

one property) should be in places where they are 

accessible and apparent for use in an emergency.


The length of drain or sewer under a 

building should not exceed 6m except with 

the permission of the owners of the drain or 

sewer (i.e.


1.6  Buildings or extensions should not be 

constructed over or within 3m of any drain or 

sewer more than 3m deep, or greater than 

225mm in diameter except with the permission 

of the owners of the drain or sewer (i.e.


Protection of the drain or sewer 

during construction

Any drain or sewer should be protected 

from damage by construction traffic and heavy 

machinery.


1.8  Where piling works are being carried out 

care should be taken to avoid damage to any 

drain or sewer.


The position of the drain or sewer 

should be established by survey.


Protection from settlement

1.9  Where a drain or sewer runs under a 

building at least 100mm of granular or other 

suitable flexible filling should be provided round 

the pipe.


Where the crown of the pipe is within 

300mm of the underside of the slab, special 

protection should be provided (see Approved 

Document H1, Section 2, paragraph 2.44).


1.10  Where a drain or sewer running below 

a building is less than 2m deep, the foundation 

should be extended locally so that the drain or 

sewer passes through the wall (see paragraph 1.11).


1.11  Where a drain or sewer runs through a 

wall or foundation suitable measures should be 

taken to prevent damage or misalignment.


Approved Document H Drainage and waste disposalH4 

GUIDANCE

1.12  Where the drain or sewer is more than 2m 

deep to invert and passes beneath the foundations, 

the foundations should be designed as a lintel 

spanning over the line of the drain or sewer.


The 

span of the lintel should extend at least 1.5m 

either side of the pipe and should be designed so 

that no load is transmitted onto the drain or sewer.


1.13  A drain trench should not be excavated 

lower than the foundations of any building 

nearby.


Any  system  for  discharging  water  to  a  sewer  which  is 

provided pursuant to paragraph H3 shall be separate from that 

provided for the conveyance of foul water from the building.


Contaminated runoff

Approved Document H3 paragraph 3.21 

deals with drainage from areas where materials 

are stored which could contaminate runoff.


This could cause pollution if discharged to a 

surface water sewer.


(1)  Adequate  provision  shall  be  made  for  storage  of 

solid waste.


(2)  Adequate means of access shall be provided:

(a)  for people in the building to the place of storage; and

(b)  from  the  place  of  storage  to  a  collection  point 

(where one has been specified by the waste collection authority 

under Section 46 (household waste) or Section 47 (commercial 

waste)  of  the  Environmental  Protection Act  1990  (a)  or  to  a 

street (where no collection point has been specified).


The waste collection authority has powers 

under Section 46 (Receptacles for household 

waste) and Section 47 (Receptacles for commercial 

or industrial waste) to specify the type and 

number of receptacles to be used and the 

location where the waste should be placed for 

collection.


Where collections are 

less frequent than once per week, this allowance 

should be increased accordingly.


Low rise domestic developments  

In low rise domestic developments (houses, 

bungalows and flats up to 4th floor) any dwelling 

should have, or have access to, a location where 

at least two movable individual or communal 

waste containers, meeting the requirements of 

the waste collection authority, can be stored.


1.4  Where communal storage areas are 

provided space requirements should be 

determined in consultation with the waste 

collection authority.


Alternatively 

storage compounds or rooms should be provided.


In such a case a satisfactory management 

arrangement for conveying refuse to the storage 

area should be assured.


Siting

Storage areas for waste containers and 

chutes should be sited so that the distance 

householders are required to carry refuse does 

not usually exceed 30m (excluding any vertical 

distance).


Containers should be within 25m of 

the waste collection point specified by the waste 

collection authority.


The location for storage of waste 

containers should be sited so that, unless it is 

completely unavoidable, the containers can be 

taken to the collection point without being taken 

through a building, unless it is a porch or garage, 

or a car port or other open covered space (this 

provision applies only to new buildings except 

that extensions or conversions should not 

remove such a facility where one already exists).


1.10  For waste containers up to 250 litres, steps  

should be avoided between the container store 

and collection point wherever possible and should  

not exceed 3 in number.


Slopes should not exceed  

1:12.


Exceptionally this may be exceeded 

provided that the lengths are not excessive and it 

is not part of a series of slopes.


For storage 

areas where larger containers are to be used steps  

should be avoided.


Where this is not otherwise 

possible, the storage area should be relocated.


1.11  The collection point should be reasonably 

accessible to the size of waste collection vehicles 

typically used by the waste collection authority.


1.12  External storage areas for waste containers 

should be away from windows and ventilators and 

preferably be in shade or under shelter.


Design

1.13  Unsightly bins can damage the visual 

amenity of an area and contribute to increased 

levels of antisocial nuisance such as odour and 

litter, so bin storage should be planned carefully.


in a front garden) an enclosure or 

shelter should be considered.


Enclosures, compounds or storage rooms for 

communal containers should be a minimum of 

2m high.


Enclosures for individual containers 

should be sufficiently high to allow the lid to 

be opened for filling.


The enclosure should be 

permanently ventilated at the top and bottom 

and should have a paved impervious floor.


1.16  Any room for the open storage of waste 

should be secure to prevent access by vermin.


1.17  Where storage rooms are provided, 

separate rooms should be provided for the 

storage of waste which cannot be recycled, 

and waste which can be recycled.


1.18  Highrise domestic developments 

 where chutes are provided they should be at 

least 450mm diameter and should have a smooth 

nonabsorbent surface and close fitting access 

doors at each storey which has a dwelling and 

be ventilated at the top and bottom.


1.21  Any room for the open storage of waste 

should be secure to prevent access by vermin.


1.22  Waste storage areas should be marked 

and signs should be provided.


A.2  Under Section 46 (Receptacles for household 

waste) of the Environmental Protection Act 1990, 

the local authority may require:

a.  waste of certain types to be stored separately 

so that it can be recycled;

b.  occupiers of dwellings to provide containers 

of a specified type for storage of waste;

c.  additional containers to be provided for 

separate storage of recyclable waste;

d.  locations where containers should be placed 

for emptying.


A.4  Under Section 47 (Receptacles for 

commercial or industrial waste) of the Environmental 

Protection Act 1990, the local authority may 

still require:

a.  waste of certain types to be stored separately 

so that it can be recycled;

b.  occupiers to provide containers of a specified 

type for storage of waste;

c.  additional containers to be provided for 

separate storage of recyclable waste;

d.  locations where containers should be placed 

for emptying.


In giving their 

consent, the local authority may specify conditions 

regarding the provision of an alternative means of 

access for removal of refuse.


BS 6798:2000 

Specification for installation of gasfired hot 

water boilers of rated input not exceeding 70kW.


Specifications for ancillary 

fittings including shallow inspection chambers.)


