(1)   Building work must be carried out so as to ensure 

that the building is equipped with a highspeed

ready inbuilding physical infrastructure, up to a 

network termination point for highspeed electronic 

communications networks.


(2)  Where the work concerns a building containing more 

than one dwelling, the work must be carried out so 

as to ensure that the building is equipped in addition 

with a common access point for highspeed electronic 

communications networks.


1.2  Requirement R1 is to provide the inbuilding physical infrastructure so that, in future, copper or 

fibreoptic cables or wireless devices capable of delivering broadband speeds greater than 30 Mbps 

can be installed.


Multidwelling buildings that 

are subject to major renovation works must be equipped with a common access point capable of 

serving all the dwellings within the building.


A person wishing to take advantage of this exemption 

would need to demonstrate to a building control body that in the particular case the cost of 

compliance would be unreasonable, taking into account the work required and the available 

alternative means of highspeed broadband delivery.


Ductwork for copper and fibreoptic cables

1.6  A suitable position for at least one network termination point should be identified for the  

erection of a new building other than a dwelling, for an existing building (including an existing 

individual dwelling) that is subject to major renovation works, and for each dwelling in an existing 

multidwelling building that is subject to major renovation works.


Suitable ducting should be 

provided to connect all such network termination points to an appropriate access point or 

common access point.


However, it should be noted 

that alternative forms of connectivity may be used.


However, it should be noted 

that alternative forms of connectivity may be used.


Approved Document R Volume 2, 2022 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

R1 

Satellite and wireless communications

1.11  The design of the inbuilding physical infrastructure should take account of satellite and wireless 

technologies where there is evidence that the required network speeds could be met.


Highspeed electronic communications network 

An electronic communications network which is 

capable of delivering broadband access services at 

speeds of at least 30 Mbps.


