Compliance should be assessed against only one of requirements M4(1), M4(2) or M4(3) for 

any given dwelling.


0.5  Where a local planning authority sets a planning condition for Category 3 (wheelchair user) 

housing it can specify which dwellings should be wheelchair accessible by including in the planning 

permission a condition stating that optional requirement M4(3)(2)(b) applies.


Where no such 

condition is applied, optional requirement M4(3)(2)(a) will apply by default requiring that dwellings 

should be wheelchair adaptable.


0.6  The person carrying out building work must inform the building control body where any optional 

requirements apply.


Material alterations

0.11  Where a dwelling is subject to a material alteration, the building should be no less compliant with 

requirement M4(1) than it was prior to the building work taking place.


0.13  Requirements for accessibility should be balanced against preserving historic buildings or 

environments.


0.15  In meeting the provisions of Part M by providing a level or ramped approach and level threshold, 

care must be taken to ensure the moisture resistance and design of the dwelling as a whole also 

complies with requirements C2 and C4.


Reasonable provision should be made for  

people to

Requirement M4(1) does not apply to:

(a)  an extension to a dwelling; or

(a)  gain access to; and

(b)  use, the dwelling and its facilities

(b)  any part of a building that is used solely to 

enable the building or any service or fitting in the 

building to be inspected, repaired or maintained.


Approach routes

General 

1.3  The approach route should be safe and convenient for everyone, including older and disabled 

people and some wheelchair users.


It should adopt the shallowest gradient that can reasonably be 

achieved and be stepfree where possible.


1.4  The approach route should be level, gently sloping, or, where necessary, ramped.


c.  The approach route is a minimum of 900mm wide with a maximum cross fall of 1 in 40.

d.  Where a driveway forms all, or part of, the approach route, an additional allowance of at least 

900mm wide should be provided so that a wheelchair user can pass a parked car.


Individual flights are: 

for gradients up to 1:15  not more than 10m long

for gradients up to 1:12  not more than 5m long 

b.


c.  No individual flight has a rise of more than 1800mm between landings.


Where a lift is provided, it should be suitable for a wheelchair user.


The load capacity is at least 400kg.


The system can be overridden by a door reactivating device that relies on appropriate 

electronic methods (but not a door edge pressure system); provided that the lift door remains 

fully open for at least three seconds.


When the lift serves more than three storeys, it provides visual and audible indicators to 

identify the floor reached.


Private stairs and changes of level within the entrance storey 

1.16  To provide easy access between rooms on the entrance storey, a stepped change of level within 

the entrance storey should be avoided where possible.


Requirement

Optional requirement

Part M access to and use of buildings

Category 2  accessible and adaptable dwellings

Limits on application

M4(2) optional requirement

Optional requirement M4(2)

(1)  Reasonable provision must be made for people to

(a)  may apply only in relation to a dwelling that is 

(a)  gain access to; and

(b)  use, the dwelling and its facilities.


(2)  The provision made must be sufficient to

(a)  meet the needs of occupants with differing needs, 

including some older or disabled people; and

(b)  to allow adaptation of the dwelling to meet the 

changing needs of occupants over time.


2.4  Reasonable provision should be made to ensure that the approach route to any communal facilities 

that serve the dwelling meets these provisions.


Approach routes

General 

2.6  The approach route should be safe and convenient, adopt the shallowest gradient that can reasonably 

be achieved and be stepfree, irrespective of the storey on which the dwelling is located.


2.7  Where it is not reasonable to achieve a stepfree approach route to the principal private entrance, 

a stepfree approach route should be provided to a suitable alternative private entrance instead.


c.  No individual flight has a rise between landings of more than 1800mm.


Where the parking is within the private curtilage of the dwelling (but not within a carport or 

garage) at least one space is a standard parking bay that can be widened to 3.3m.


Where communal parking is provided to blocks of flats, at least one standard parking bay is 

provided close to the communal entrance of each core of the block (or to the lift core where 

the parking bay is internal).


e.  The gradient is as shallow as the site permits.


k.  Door entry controls, where provided, are mounted 9001000mm above finished ground level, 

and at least 300mm away from any projecting corner.


Communal lifts and stairs 

Communal lifts 

2.16  A wide range of people, including accompanied wheelchair users, should be able to access and 

use the lift.


Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document M Volume 1, 2015 edition 

M4(2)Table 2.1 Minimum widths of corridors and passageways for a range of doorway widthsNOTE 2: Double doors effectively provide nibs where each leaf is at least 300mm wide.


NOTE: For the purpose of demonstrating compliance with these provisions, beds should be of the 

size set out in the furniture schedule in Appendix D.

18  Approved Document M Volume 1, 2015 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

M4(2)a

750mm

750mm

Notes:

1.


Bed size in accordance 

with the furniture schedule 

in Appendix D.

Diagram 2.4  Clear access zones to principal bedroom

all dimensions are minimum except where noted

Sanitary facilities

General provisions

2.26 All walls, ducts and boxings to the WC/cloakroom, bathroom and shower room should be  

strong enough to support grab rails, seats and other adaptations that could impose a load of up to 

1.5kN/m2.


In WC/cloakrooms the basin and/or WC may encroach into the shower space but this should be minimised.


Any radiator or towel rail should be clear of all access zones.


c.  The handle to at least one window in the principal living area is located between 450mm and 

1200mm above floor level, unless the window is fitted with a remote opening device that is 

within this height range.


Requirement

Optional requirement

Category 3  wheelchair user dwellings

Limits on application

M4(3) optional requirement

Optional requirement M4(3)

(1)  Reasonable provision must be made for people to

(a)  may apply only in relation to a dwelling that is 

(a)  gain access to, and

(b)  use, the dwelling and its facilities.


(2)  The provision made must be sufficient to

(a)  allow simple adaptation of the dwelling to meet 

the needs of occupants who use wheelchairs; or

(b)  meet the needs of occupants who use wheelchairs.


Optional requirement M4(3) (2)(b) applies only  

where the planning permission under which the 

building work is carried out specifies that it shall  

be complied with.


d.  The dwelling is wheelchair adaptable such that key parts of the accommodation, including 

sanitary facilities and kitchens, could be easily altered to meet the needs of a wheelchair user 

or, where required by a local planning authority, the dwelling is wheelchair accessible.


Approach routes

General provisions 

3.7  The approach route should be safe and convenient for everyone, be at the shallowest gradient that 

can reasonably be achieved, and be stepfree, irrespective of the storey on which the dwelling is 

located.


3.8  A stepfree approach route should be provided to all private entrances.


c.  No individual flight has a rise of more than 1800mm between landings.


This grippable handrail is  

8501000mm above the pitch line of the flight and extends at least 300mm beyond the top  

and bottom nosings.


l.  Power assisted opening is provided where the opening force of the door is more than  

30N from 0 to 30 or more than 22.5N from 30 to 60 of the opening cycle.


3.20 In order to demonstrate that the dwelling is capable of meeting the functional and spatial 

provisions for a wheelchair adaptable or wheelchair accessible dwelling, furnished plan layouts 

that show the access zones and other provisions of Section 3B and the furniture of the furniture 

schedule included as Appendix D of this approved document should be provided to a scale of at 

least 1:100.


Number of bedrooms

Minimum storage area (m2)

NOTE: For the purposes of Table 3.1, include areas with reduced headroom as follows:

  headroom between 900mm and 1500mm: at 50 of its area

lower than 900mm: do not count.


The full area under a stair that forms part of the storage provision should be counted as 1m2.


Throughfloor lifting device provision 

3.27 To ensure that provision can be made for a wheelchair user to access to all parts of a dwelling on 

more than one floor level, the dwelling should comply with either the requirements of paragraph 

3.28 for a wheelchair adaptable dwelling or 3.29 for a wheelchair accessible dwelling.


3.28 Where the dwelling is defined as wheelchair adaptable, it should be easy to install a lift.


Any floors, walls and doors that have been installed to allow the potential liftway to be used 

as storage or for other purposes could be easily removed without structural alteration.


3.29 Where the dwelling is defined as wheelchair accessible, a suitable throughfloor lift or lifting 

platform should be installed and commissioned and the dwelling should comply with all of the 

following.


c.  A minimum 1500mm clear turning circle, clear of the liftway door when open at 90 degrees, 

could be provided in front of the liftway door at every floor level, as shown in Diagram 3.7.

d.  A power socket, suitable for powering the lifting device, is provided close to the liftway.


f.  Lifting devices should be positioned with the end opposite to the entry point located against a 

wall at every floor level.


2.Turning circle should be clear of 

top step of any adjacent flight 

of steps.


all dimensions are minimum except where noted

Diagram 3.7  Access to through floor lift

Building Regulations 2010  

Approved Document M Volume 1, 2015 edition 

M4(3)

Private stairs and changes of level within the dwelling

3.30 An ambulant disabled person should be able to move within, and between, storeys.


Number of bedspaces

Minimum floor area m2

Kitchen and eating areas

3.32  The relationship between the kitchen, dining and living areas should be convenient and stepfree.


The overall length of kitchen worktop meets at least the provisions of Table 3.3.


Drawings demonstrate how the kitchen could be easily adapted to meet the provisions of  

paragraph 3.34 and Table 3.4 at a future date without compromising the space in any other part 

of the dwelling and without the need to move structural walls, stacks or concealed drainage.


Unit length should be measured through midline of the

worktop, not the front or rear edge.


Wheelchair accessible layout

a        sink and drainer

b        hob

c        suitable space for builtin oven (c/l 800900mm)

d        dishwasher

e        washing machine

f         fridge freezer

g        recycling

h        storage base units (inc. corner units)

Allow for shallow, insulated sink bowl with swivel, mixer tap  and flexible plumbing and provide a min.


400mm length of

worktop to at least one side of the oven and fridge/freezer.


c.  The sink is not more than 150mm deep with insulation to the underside to prevent scalding  

of a wheelchair users legs.


d.  Taps should be lever operated and capable of easy operation.


g.  There is a minimum of 400mm of worktop to at least one side of the oven and fridge or fridge 

freezer where this is taller than the worktop height (or to one side of a pair of tall appliances 

where they are located together at the end of a run).


Number of bedspaces

Minimum worktop length (mm)

3  4

Bedrooms

3.35  One bedroom should be close to an accessible bathroom suitable for a wheelchair user.


All other bedrooms should be accessible to a wheelchair user.


Every single bedroom has a minimum floor area of 8.5m2 and is at least 2.4m wide.


d.  All walls, ducts and boxings to every WC/cloakroom, bath and shower room are strong enough 

to support grab rails, seats and other adaptations that could impose a load of 1.5kN/m2.


g.  Where sanitary facilities are wheelchair accessible, WC pans should be a minimum of 400mm high.


h.  Where sanitary facilities are wheelchair accessible, basins and sinks should be wall hung 

(typically with their rim 770850mm above finished floor level) and the clear zone beneath 

basins, services and pedestals is maximised to enable wheelchair users to approach.


Ideally this 

clear zone should be in the range 400600mm from finished floor level.


NOTE 3: For the purposes of establishing number of bedspaces relevant to these requirements,  

a bedroom at or above 8.5m2 and below 12.5m2 in size is counted as one bedspaces, and equal to or 

greater than 12.5m2 as two bedspaces.


Wheelchair accessible dwellings must also 

provide both a level access shower and a bath

Two or three storey dwelling (typically a house or maisonette)

Occupancy

2 or 3 bedspaces

4 bedspaces

5 bedspaces or more

Typical minimum sanitary provision

Bathroom with level access shower on same level as principal  

bedroom  entrance storey WC/cloakroom (where bathroom not on 

the entrance storey)

Bathroom with level access shower on same level as principal bedroom 

and entrance storey WC/cloakroom or second bathroom

Bathroom with level access shower on same level as principal 

bedroom and entrance storey WC/cloakroom or second bathroom.


Wheelchair accessible dwellings must also provide both a level access 

shower and a bath

WC facilities on the entrance storey

3.37  To make suitable and convenient provision for a wheelchair user to use a WC, the dwelling should 

comply with all of the following.


It is demonstrated how the WC/cloakroom could be easily adapted in future to meet the 

provisions of paragraph 3.39.


In WC/cloakrooms the basin and/or WC may encroach into the shower space but this should be minimised.


Any radiator or towel rail should be clear of all access zones.


Any radiator or towel rail should be clear of all access zones.


Doors must be capable of opening outwards  in wheelchair adaptable 

bathrooms the door may open inwards providing that the door can be easily 

rehung to open outwards (e.g.


The bathroom containing the installed level access shower should be located on the same 

storey as the principal double bedroom described in paragraph 3.35.


The WC, basin, bath and shower (and their associated clear access zones) meet at least the 

provisions shown in Diagram 3.10.


Drawings illustrate how the bathroom could be easily adapted in future to meet the provisions 

for a wheelchair accessible bathroom set out in paragraph 3.43 (but need only show either a 

bath or level access shower, not both).


In dwellings with five bedspaces or more, both a useable bath and an installed level access 

shower are provided (either in one bathroom or in more than one bathroom on the same 

storey as the principal bedroom).


Doors must be capable of opening outwards  in wheelchair adaptable 

bathrooms the door may open inwards providing that the door can be easily 

rehung to open outwards (e.g.


WC doors must be capable of 

opening outwards.


WC doors must be capable of 

opening outwards.


Consumer units should be mounted so that the switches are between 1350mm and 1450mm 

above floor level.


d.  The handle to at least one window in the principal living area is 7001000mm above floor level, 

unless fitted with a remote opening device that is within this height range.


Accessible threshold

A threshold that is level or, if raised, has a total 

height of not more than 15mm, a minimum number 

of upstands and slopes and with any upstands 

higher than 5mm chamfered.


Skirtings 

totalling up to 50mm total thickness and shallow 

projecting ducts or casings above 1800mm may be 

discounted when measuring clear width.


Communal or common (area, facilities or entrances)

Shared area accessed by, or intended for the use 

of, more than one dwelling.


Installed level access shower

Stepfree area with no lips or upstands, suitable 

for showering, with a floor laid to shallow falls 

towards a floor gulley connected to the drainage 

system.


Level

Gradient not exceeding 1:60

Liftway

Vertical route linking all floors of a dwelling 

accommodating (or capable of accommodating) a 

lift or lifting platform.


Localised obstruction

Short, fixed element, such as a bollard lighting 

column or radiator, not more than 150mm deep 

that may intrude into a path, route, or corridor, 

that does not unduly restrict the passage of a 

wheelchair user.


Ramped

Gradient between 1:20 and 1:12 

52  Approved Document M Volume 1, 2015 edition 

Building Regulations 2010

A

Standard parking bay

A parking bay 2.4m wide x 4.8m long

Steeply sloping plot

A plot where the gradient exceeds 1:15.


