However, building work

may be subject to more than one requirement of

the Building Regulations.


Consideration of technical risk.

In relation to the installation of new and

replacement sanitation and hot water services,

building work must satisfy all the technical

requirements set out in Schedule 1 to the

Building Regulations.


Attention should be paid

in particular to the need to comply with Part

A (Structure), Part B (Fire safety), Part C (Site

preparation and resistance to contaminants and

moisture), Part J (Combustion appliances and

fuel storage systems), Part L (Conservation of

fuel and power) and Part P (Electrical safety),

as well as Part G.

INTRODUCTION.

How to use this. 

In this document the following conventions

have been adopted to assist understanding and

interpretation:

a. Texts shown against a green background

are extracts from the Building Regulations or

Building (Approved Inspectors etc.).


It should be remembered

however that, as noted above, building works

must comply with all the other applicable

provisions of Building Regulations.


It should be remembered

however that, as noted above, building works

must comply with all the other applicable

provisions of Building Regulations.


BCB means Building Control Body: a local

authority or an Approved Inspector.


Building means any permanent or temporary

building, but not any other kind of structure or

erection, and a reference to a building includes

a reference to part of a building.


Combined temperature and pressure relief

valve means a mechanically operated valve that

opens to discharge water when a fixed (factory

set) temperature or fixed (factory set) pressure

is exceeded.


Direct heating means a method of heating in

which the heat source is integral with the hot water

vessel.


Domestic hot water means water that has been

heated for cooking, food preparation, personal

washing or cleaning purposes.


Earth-closet means a closet having a movable

receptacle for the reception of faecal matter and

its deodorisation by the use of earth, ashes or

chemicals, or by other methods.


Exempt buildings and work means the erection

of any building or extension of a kind described

in regulation 9 of and Schedule 2 to the Building

Regulations 2010; or the carrying out of any

work to or in connection with such a building or

extension, if after the carrying out of that work it

is still a building or extension of a kind described

in that Schedule.


Expansion vessel means a vessel to temporarily

accommodate the expansion of water from the

unvented hot water storage vessel as it is heated.


Harvested rainwater means rainwater harvested

from roofs or other suitable surfaces and

collected and stored.


Heated wholesome water means water that,

when cold, was wholesome in accordance with

the definition below and has been subjected to

a heat source to increase its temperature.


Hot water storage system means a vessel

for storing:

a. heated wholesome hot water or softened

wholesome hot water for subsequent use

b. water that is used to heat other water

together with any ancillary safety devices

described in paragraphs 3.10 and 3.11 of this

 and all other applicable

operating devices.


Hot water storage system package means

a hot water storage system having the

safety devices described in 3.10 and 3.17 of

this  factory-fitted by the

manufacturer, together with a kit containing other

applicable devices supplied by the manufacturer

to be fitted by the installer.


Hot water storage system unit means a hot

water storage system having the safety devices

described in 3.10 and 3.17 of this Approved

Document and all other applicable operating

devices factory-fitted by the manufacturer.


Indirect heating means a method of heating

stored water through a heat exchanger.


Kitchen means a room or part of a room which

contains a sink and food preparation facilities

Material alteration means an alteration which

results in a building or a controlled service

or fitting not complying with, or being more

unsatisfactory than it was before in relation to

Schedule 1 requirements in relation to structure,

means of warning and escape, internal and

external fire spread, fire service access and

facilities, and access and use.


Non-self-resetting energy cut-out means a

device that will interrupt the supply of heat to a

hot water storage vessel when a fixed (factory

set) temperature is exceeded.


If this protective

device is actuated it should only be possible to

reset it manually.

GENERAL GUIDANCE.

Preparation of food means handling, making

and cooking of food.


Pressure relief valve means a mechanically

operated valve that opens to discharge water

when a fixed (factory set) pressure is exceeded.


Primary thermal store means a store of heat

energy that can be used to heat domestic

hot water by means of a heat exchanger.


Risk assessment for the purposes of this

document means the identification of the hazards

associated with a process or activity combined

with an assessment of the probability and

consequences of each hazard.


Room for residential purposes means a room,

or a suite of rooms, which is not a dwellinghouse or a flat and which is used by one or

more persons to live and sleep in, and includes

a room in a hostel, a hotel, a boarding house, a

hall of residence or a residential home, but does

not include a room in a hospital, or other similar

establishment, used for patient accommodation.


Sanitary accommodation means a room

containing a WC or urinal, whether or not it also

contains other sanitary appliances.


Sanitary appliance means WC, urinal, bath,

shower, washbasin, sink, bidet and drinking

fountain.


Sanitary convenience means closets and urinals.


Sink means a receptacle used for holding water

(for preparation of food or washing up) supplied

through a tap and having a wastepipe.


Softened wholesome water means water

which would be regarded as wholesome for the

purposes of regulations made under section

67 of the Water Industry Act 1991 (standards

of wholesomeness) as they apply for the

purposes of Part G of Schedule 1 in accordance

with paragraph (2c) but for the presence of

sodium in excess of the level specified in those

regulations if it is caused by a water softener

or water softening process which reduces the

concentrations of calcium and magnesium.


Tundish means a device, installed in the

discharge pipe from a valve, that provides an

air break allowing discharge to be conducted

safely to a place of termination.


Temperature relief valve means a mechanically

operated valve that opens to discharge water

when a fixed (factory set) temperature is

exceeded.


Unvented (closed) hot water storage system

means a vessel fed with cold water from a supply

pipe or dedicated storage cistern (without a

vent pipe) and in which water is heated directly

or indirectly.


Expansion of the water when it is

heated is accommodated either internally or

externally and the system is fitted with safety

devices to prevent water temperatures exceeding

100C, and other applicable operating devices to

control primary flow, prevent backflow, control

working pressure and accommodate expansion.


Urinal means an appliance used for reception

and disposal of urine.


Vented (open) hot water storage system means

a vessel fed with cold water from a dedicated

storage cistern.


Water-closet (WC) means a closet that has

a separate fixed receptacle connected to a

drainage system and separate provision for

flushing from a supply of clean water either by

the operation of a mechanism or by automatic

action.


Wholesome water means water complying

with the requirements of regulations made under

Section 67 (Standards of wholesomeness) of the

Water Industry Act 1991.


In addition, Building Regulations

may apply in cases where the purposes for

which or the manner or circumstances in which

a building or part of a building is used change in a way that constitutes a material change of use.


Under regulation 4 of the Building Regulations

2010, building work should be carried out in such

a way that, on completion of work,

i. the building complies with the applicable

Parts of Schedule 1 of the Building Regulations.


Where

there is a material change of use the Building

Regulations set requirements that must be met

before the building can be used for its new purpose.


a building is used as an institution where

previously it was not

 a building is used as a public building where

previously it was not

 a building no longer comes within the

exemptions in Schedule 2 to the Building

Regulations where previously it did

 a building which contains at least one

dwelling contains a greater or lesser number

of dwellings than it did previously

 a building contains a room for residential

purposes where previously it did not

 a building which contains at least one room

for residential purposes contains a greater

or lesser number of such rooms than it did

previously

 a building is used as a shop where previously

it was not.

Parts G1, G3(1) to (3) and G4 to G6 will apply to

all the material changes of use mentioned above.


This means that whenever such changes occur

the building must be brought up to the standards

required by Parts G1 and G3 to G6.


When undertaking work on or in connection with

buildings with special historic or architectural

value, the aim should be to improve sanitation

and hot water safety where and to the extent

that it is possible provided that the work does

not prejudice the character of the host building

or increase the risk of longterm deterioration to

the buildings fabric or fittings.


In order to join such a scheme a person must

demonstrate competence to carry out the type

of work the scheme covers, and also the ability

to comply with all relevant requirements in the

Building Regulations.


This is restricted

to a single appliance and any associated

controls and must not be connected to, or

form part of, any other fixed building service.


the replacement of a sanitary convenience

with one that uses no more water than the

one it replaces, a washbasin, sink, bidet,

fixed bath, or a shower but only where the

work does not include any work to:

 underground drainage

 the hot or cold water system or aboveground drainage which could prejudice

the health and safety of any person on

completion of work;

iv. replacing any part or adding an output or control

device to an existing cold water supply;

v. providing a hot water storage system that

has a storage vessel with a capacity not

exceeding 15 litres provided that any electrical

work associated with the installation is also

not notifiable.


Please note that the Regulations do not require

the provision of hot or cold water systems to

such exempt buildings, but if such systems are

provided they must meet the minimum hygiene

and safety requirements in those Parts.


All other Classes of buildings within Schedule 2

retain their exemption from compliance with

Part G.

Materials and workmanship.

Any building work which is subject to the

requirements imposed by Schedule 1 to the

Building Regulations shall be carried out in

accordance with regulation 7.


(1) There must be a suitable installation for the provision of:

 (a) wholesome water to any place where drinking water is

drawn off;

 (b) wholesome water or softened wholesome water to any

washbasin or bidet provided in or adjacent to a room containing

a sanitary convenience;

 (c) wholesome water or softened wholesome water to any

washbasin, bidet, fixed bath or shower in a bathroom; and

 (d) wholesome water to any sink provided in any area

where food is prepared.


(2) There must be a suitable installation for the provision of

water of suitable quality to any sanitary convenience fitted with

a flushing device.


1.3 Where a building is supplied with water

from a source other than a water undertaker

or licensed water supplier, the water shall be

considered to be wholesome if it meets the criteria

set out in the Private Water Supplies Regulations

2009 (SI 2009/3101) in England or the Private

Water Supplies (Wales) Regulations (SI 2010/66)

in Wales.


1.14 Any system/unit used to supply dwellings

with water from alternative sources should be

subject to a risk assessment by the system

designer and manufacturer, and appropriate

testing carried out to demonstrate that any risks

have been suitably addressed.


Reasonable provision must be made by the installation of

fittings and fixed appliances that use water efficiently for the

prevention of undue consumption of water.


(1) The potential consumption of wholesome water by

persons occupying a new dwelling must not exceed

the requirement in paragraph (2).


(3) This paragraph applies where the planning permission

under which the building work is carried out

 (a) specifies the optional requirement in paragraph (2)(b); and

 (b) makes it a condition that that requirement must be

complied with.


(1) Where regulation 36 applies, the person carrying out

the work must give the local authority a notice which

specifies

 (a) which of the requirements in regulation 36(2)(a) or (b)

applies to the dwelling; and

 (b) the potential consumption of wholesome water per

person per day in relation to the completed dwelling.


WATER EFFICIENCY. 

Guidance.

In the Secretary of States view Requirement G2

will be met for new dwellings if:

a. the estimated consumption of wholesome

water resulting from the design of cold and

hot water systems (calculated in accordance

with the methodology set out in Appendix A

to this approved document and taking into

account the use of any alternative sources

of water provided in accordance with G1(2))

is not greater than the standard set by the

Secretary of State of 125 litres/person/day of

wholesome water or 110 litres/person/day

where the optional requirement applies;

b. the manner in which sanitary appliances and

white goods used in the design calculation

undertaken to demonstrate compliance with

paragraph (a) are provided and installed in the

dwelling takes account of the other provisions

in this approved document;

c. the manner in which any alternative sources

of water used in the design calculation

undertaken to demonstrate compliance with

paragraph (a) are supplied to the dwelling,

takes account of other provisions in this

approved document;

d. a record of the sanitary appliances and

white goods used in the water consumption

calculation and installed in the dwelling

is provided along with sufficient other

information enabling building owners or

occupiers to maintain the building and its

services so as to maintain the water efficiency

of the building.


Where a building consists of more than one

dwelling (such as a block of flats) it should be

designed so that the estimated consumption of

wholesome water resulting from the design of the

cold and hot water systems for each individual

dwelling should be no greater than the target.


General.

2.1 The water used by sanitary appliances

and relevant white goods in a new dwelling

should be calculated using the manufacturers

declared value for water consumption of each

of those appliances and white goods.


2.2 The estimated water consumption of a

new dwelling should be calculated in accordance

with the methodology set out in Appendix A,

referred to as the water efficiency calculator.


2.3 The estimated consumption of

wholesome water of a new dwelling should

be no more than 125 litres/person/day or

110 litres/person/day where the optional

requirement applies.


2.4 Where alternative sources of water are to

be used in the dwelling design, this should be

reflected in the estimate of water use.


2.6 Where the fittings approach is used, the

water consumption of the fittings provided must

not exceed the values in Table 2.1.


If they do, the

water efficiency calculator must be completed

to demonstrate compliance.


Similarly, where a

shower is not to be provided or where a waste

disposal unit, a water softener or water reuse

is to be provided the water efficiency calculator

must be completed.


Where it applies, the estimated consumption

of wholesome water calculated in accordance

with the methodology in the water efficiency

calculator, should not exceed 110 litres/person/day.


2.9 The person carrying out the work must

inform the BCB where the optional requirement

applies.


2.11 Where the fittings approach is used, the

water consumption of the fittings provided must

not exceed the values in Table 2.2.


If they do, the

water efficiency calculator must be completed

to demonstrate compliance.


Similarly, where a

shower is not to be provided or where a waste

disposal unit, a water softener or water reuse

is to be provided the water efficiency calculator

must be completed.


2.14 In most cases, this notice must be given

to the BCB no later than five days after the

completion of the building work.


However,

where the BCB is an Approved Inspector and

the dwelling is occupied before completion,

the notice must be given no later than the day

that the initial notice ceases to be in force in

consequence of regulation 18 of the Building

(Approved Inspectors etc) Regulations when this

is earlier than five days after the completion of

the work.


2.15 It is permissible for the notice to be served

on the BCB electronically provided the BCB has

stated its willingness to receive the document by

those means and it is delivered to the electronic

address that the body has specified.


(1) There must be a suitable installation for the provision of

heated wholesome water or heated softened wholesome water to:

 (a) any washbasin or bidet provided in or adjacent to a

room containing a sanitary convenience;

 (b) any washbasin, bidet, fixed bath and shower in a

bathroom; and

 (c) any sink provided in any area where food is prepared.


(2) A hot water system, including any cistern or other vessel

that supplies water to or receives expansion water from a hot

water system, shall be designed, constructed and installed so as

to resist the effects of temperature and pressure that may occur

either in normal use or in the event of such malfunctions as may

reasonably be anticipated, and must be adequately supported.


(3) A hot water system that has a hot water storage vessel shall

incorporate precautions to:

 (a) prevent the temperature of the water stored in the

vessel at any time exceeding 100C; and

 (b) ensure that any discharge from safety devices is safely

conveyed to where it is visible but will not cause a danger to

persons in or about the building.


(4) The hot water supply to any fixed bath must be so designed and

installed as to incorporate measures to ensure that the temperature

of the water that can be delivered to that bath does not exceed 48C.


In the Secretary of States view Requirement

G3(3) will be met for a hot water storage

system that has a vented storage vessel if:

a. the storage vessel has a suitable vent pipe

connecting the top of the vessel to a point

open to the atmosphere above the level of

the water in the cold water storage cistern

and over it; and,

b. in addition to any thermostat, either the heat

source, or the storage vessel is fitted with a

device that will prevent the temperature of the

stored water at any time exceeding 100C; and

c. the hot water system has pipework that

incorporates a provision for the discharge

of hot water from the safety devices to an

appropriate place open to the atmosphere

where it will cause no danger to persons in

or about the building.


In the Secretary of States view Requirement

G3(3) will be met for a hot water system that has

an unvented storage vessel if:

a. the storage vessel has at least two

independent safety devices such as those

that release pressure and so prevent the

temperature of the stored water at any

time exceeding 100C in addition to any

thermostat; and

b. the hot water system has pipework that

incorporates a provision for the discharge of

hot water from safety devices to be visible

at some point and safely conveys it to an

appropriate place open to the atmosphere

where it will cause no danger to persons in

or about the building.


3.4 Electrical work associated with hot water

systems should be carried out in accordance

with BS7671:2008 Requirements for electrical

installations (IEE Wiring Regulations 17th Edition).


3.7 Pipework should be designed and installed

in such a way as to minimise the transfer time

between the hot water storage system and hot

water outlets.


Design and installation of directly

or indirectly heated hot water

storage systems.

General.

3.10 Hot water storage systems should be

designed and installed in accordance with BS

6700:2006  A1:2009 Specification for design,

installation, testing and maintenance of services

supplying water for domestic use within buildings

and their curtilages or BS EN 12897:2006

Water supply.


Vented hot water storage systems

3.12 Vented hot water storage systems

should incorporate a vent pipe of an adequate

size, but not less than 19mm internal diameter,

connecting the top of the hot water storage

vessel to a point open to the atmosphere above

and over the level of the water in the cold water

storage cistern.


3.13 In addition to the vent pipe referred to

in 3.12 and any thermostat provided to control

the temperature of the stored water to a desired

temperature, vented hot water storage systems

should incorporate either:

a. for all direct heat sources, a nonselfresetting

energy cutout to disconnect the supply of

heat to the storage vessel in the event of the

storage system overheating; and,

 for all indirect heat sources, an overheat 

cutout to disconnect the supply of heat to

the storage vessel in the event of the stored

water overheating so that the temperature of

the stored water does not exceed 100C; or

b. an appropriate safety device, for example,

a temperature relief valve or a combined

temperature and pressure relief valve to

safely discharge the water in the event of

significant over heating.


3.15 The cold water storage cistern into which

the vent pipe discharges should be supported

on a flat, level, rigid platform which is capable

of safely withstanding the weight of the cistern

when filled with water to the rim and fully

supporting the bottom of the cistern over the

whole of its area.


Note: Where an existing metal cistern is

replaced, or a plastic cistern is replaced by one

with larger dimensions, the existing support

should be upgraded, as necessary, with one in

accordance with paragraph 3.15.


3.16 The cistern should be accessible for

maintenance, cleaning and replacement.


These shall be in addition to

any thermostat provided to control the desired

temperature of the stored water.


3.22 Any unvented hot water storage system

up to 500 litres and less than 45kW should be in

the form of a proprietary hot water storage

system unit or package.


The package and

components should be appropriate to the

circumstances in which they are used and should

satisfy an appropriate standard that will ensure

the requirements of regulation G3(2) and G3(3)

will be met (e.g. BS EN 12897:2006 Water Supply.
Specification for indirectly heated unvented (closed)
hot water storage systems or BS 6700:2006 +
A1:2009 Design, installation, testing and
maintenance of services supplying water for
domestic use within buildings and their curtilages).


3.23 Any unvented hot water storage system

unit or package should be indelibly marked with

the following information:

a. the manufacturers name and contact details;

b. a model reference;

c. the rated storage capacity of the storage

water heater;

d. the operating pressure of the system and the

operating pressure of the expansion valve;

e. relevant operating data on each of the safety

devices fitted; and

f. the maximum primary circuit pressure and

flow temperature of indirect hot water

storage system units or packages.


Where this is the

case, the unvented hot water storage system

should be designed to the safety requirements in

3.17 by an appropriately qualified engineer.


3.27 Any unvented hot water storage system

having a power input of more than 45kW, but

a capacity of 500 litres or less should be in

the form of a proprietary hot water storage

system unit or package.


The package and

components should be appropriate to the

circumstances in which they are used and

should satisfy an appropriate standard that

will ensure the requirement of regulation G3(2)

and G3(3) will be met (e.g. BS EN 12897:2006 Water Supply.
Specification for indirectly heated unvented (closed)
hot water storage systems or BS 6700:2006 +
A1:2009 Design, installation, testing and
maintenance of services supplying water for
domestic use within buildings and their curtilages).


it is wired up to a motorised valve or some

other suitable device to shut off the flow to the

primary heater), the energy cutout should

comply with the relevant European Standard

(see paragraph 3.29) or the supplier or installer

should be able to demonstrate that the device

has equivalent performance to that set out in

relevant standards.


3.32 Where there is more than one energy cutout (see paragraph 3.35), each nonselfresetting

energy cutout should be independent (e.g. each
should have a separate motorised valve and a
separate temperature sensor).


Temperature and pressure relief devices.

3.34 Where relevant, appropriate pressure,

temperature or temperature and pressureactivated safety devices should be fitted in addition

to a safety device such as an energy cut-out.


In

such cases there should be a second nonselfresetting energy cutout independent of the one

provided in accordance with paragraph 3.18(a).


3.37 Temperature relief valves (see paragraph

3.18) should be sized to give a discharge rating

at least equal to the total power input to the

hot water storage system, when measured in

accordance with Appendix F of BS 62832:1991

or BS EN 1490:2000.


3.38 Temperature relief valve(s) or combined

temperature and pressure relief valve(s) (see

paragraph 3.18) should be located directly on the

storage vessel, such that the stored water does

not exceed 100C.


3.39 In hot water storage system units

and packages, the temperature relief valve(s)

(see paragraph 3.18) should be:

a. factory fitted and should not be disconnected

other than for replacement; and

b. not relocated in any other device or fitting

installed.


3.41 The installation of an unvented system is

notifiable building work which must be notified to

the BCB before work commences.


3.48 Where solar water heating systems are used,

an additional heat source should be available.


Note: The additional heat source should be

used, when necessary, to maintain the water

temperature to restrict microbial growth.


3.49 As some solar hot water systems operate

at elevated temperatures and pressures, and

so all components should be rated to the

appropriate temperatures and pressures.


3.51 The diameter of discharge pipe (D1)

should be not less than the nominal outlet size of

the safety device, e.g. temperature relief valve.


3.52 Where a manifold is used it should be

sized to accept and discharge the total discharge

from the discharge pipes connected to it.


3.53 Where valves other than a temperature

and pressure relief valve from a single unvented

hot water system discharge by way of the same

manifold that is used by the safety devices, the

manifold should be factory fitted as part of the

hot water storage system unit or package.


Tundish.

3.54 The tundish should be vertical, located

in the same space as the unvented hot water

storage system and be fitted as close as

possible to, and lower than, the safety device,

with no more than 600mm of pipe between the

valve outlet and the tundish (see Diagram 1).


3.55 Any discharge should be visible at the

tundish.


in

dwellings occupied by people with impaired

vision or mobility, consideration should be

given to the installation of a suitable safety

device to warn when discharge takes place,

e.g. electronically operated.


Discharge pipe D2.

3.56 The discharge pipe (D2) from the tundish

should:

a. have a vertical section of pipe at least 300mm

long below the tundish before any elbows or

bends in the pipework (see Diagram 1); and

b. be installed with a continuous fall of at least

1 in 200 thereafter.


3.57 The discharge pipe (D2) should be

made of:

a. metal; or

b. other material that has been demonstrated

to be capable of safely withstanding

temperatures of the water discharged and is

clearly and permanently marked to identify

HOT WATER SUPPLY AND SYSTEMS

the product and performance standard (e.g. as specified in the relevant part of BS 7291-
1:2006 Thermostatic pipes and fittings for
hot and cold water for domestic purposes
and heating installations in buildings. General requirements).


3.58 The discharge pipe D2 should be at least

one pipe size larger than the nominal outlet size

of the safety device unless its total equivalent

hydraulic resistance exceeds that of a straight

pipe 9m long, i.e. for discharge pipes between

9m and 18m the equivalent resistance length

should be at least two sizes larger than the

nominal outlet size of the safety device; between

18 and 27m at least 3 sizes larger, and so on;

bends must be taken into account in calculating

the flow resistance.


Therefore the maximum permitted length equates to 5.8m

which, is less than the actual length of 7m therefore calculate

the next largest size.


3.59 Where a single common discharge pipe

serves more than one system, it should be

at least one pipe size larger than the largest

individual discharge pipe (D2) to be connected.


3.60 The discharge pipe should not be

connected to a soil discharge stack unless it can

be demonstrated that the soil discharge stack is

capable of safely withstanding temperatures of

the water discharged, in which case, it should:

a. contain a mechanical seal, not incorporating

a water trap, which allows water into the

branch pipe without allowing foul air from the

drain to be ventilated through the tundish;

b. be a separate branch pipe with no sanitary

appliances connected to it;

c. if plastic pipes are used as branch pipes

carrying discharge from a safety device, they

should be either polybutalene (PB) or crosslinked polyethylene (PEX) complying with

national standards such as Class S of BS

72912:2006 or Class S of BS 72913:2006

respectively; and

d. be continuously marked with a warning that

no sanitary appliances should be connected

to the pipe.


Plastic pipes should be joined and assembled

with fittings appropriate to the circumstances

in which they are used as set out in

BS EN ISO 10431:2002 Plastics.


Prevention of excessive temperatures.

3.64 Where the operating temperature of

domestic hot water in the storage vessel in a

dwelling is capable of exceeding 80C under

normal operating conditions (a situation that may

occur in vessels used as heat stores and those

connected to solar heat collectors or solid fuel

boilers that do not have intervening controls

between the boiler and the vessel containing

the hot water) the outlet from the storage vessel

should be fitted with a device, such as an inline

hot water supply tempering valve in accordance

with BS EN 15092:2008 Building Valves.


Inline.

hot water tempering valves, to ensure that the

temperature supplied to the domestic hot water

distribution system does not exceed 60C.


Prevention of scalding.

3.65 The hot water supply temperature to a

bath should be limited to a maximum of 48C

by use of an inline blending valve or other

appropriate temperature control device, with

a maximum temperature stop and a suitable

arrangement of pipework.


General.

technical specifications to demonstrate that

the maximum temperature of 48C cannot be

exceeded in operation and that the product

will fail-safe (i.e. not discharge water above
the maximum temperature).


3.67 Inline blending valves and composite

thermostatic mixing valves should be compatible

with the sources of hot and cold water that

serve them.


3.68 The length of supply pipes between inline

blending valves and outlets should be kept to

a minimum in order to prevent the colonisation

of waterborne pathogens.


If intermittent use

of the bath is anticipated, provision should be

made for high temperature flushing to allow

pasteurisation of the pipes and outlet fittings.


Such events should be managed to prevent the

risk associated with inadvertent use.


Workmanship should be in accordance with

appropriate standards such as BS 800015:1990

Workmanship on Building Sites Code of practice

for hot and cold water services (domestic scale).


3.71 Fixed building services, including

controls, should be commissioned by testing and

adjusting as necessary to ensure that they use

no more fuel and power than is reasonable in the

circumstances.


3.72 Commissioning means the advancement

of these systems from the state of static completion

to working order to achieving compliance with

Part L. For each system it includes settingtowork, regulation (that is testing and adjusting

repetitively) to achieve the specified performance,

the calibration, setting up and testing of the

associated automatic control systems, and

recording of systems and the performance test

results that have been accepted as satisfactory.


3.74 Where commissioning is carried out it

must be done in accordance with a procedure

approved by the Secretary of State.


For new and

existing dwellings the approved procedure for hot

water systems is set out in the Domestic Heating

Compliance Guide; for buildings other than

dwellings in CIBSE Commissioning Code M.

3.75 Commissioning must be carried out in

such a way as not to prejudice compliance with

any applicable health and safety requirements.


Regulations (regulation 20(1) and (6)) require

that the person carrying out the work shall give

a notice to the relevant BCB that commissioning

has been carried out according to a procedure

approved by the Secretary of State, unless

testing and adjustment is not possible, or would

not affect the energy efficiency of the fixed

building service.


3.78 Where the work is carried out in

accordance with a building notice, or full plans,

or an initial notice or amendment notice, the

notice of commissioning should be given not

more than 5 days after the completion of the

commissioning work.


In other cases, for example

where work is carried out by a person registered

with a competent person scheme, it must be given

not more than 30 days after the completion of work.


Requirement.

Sanitary conveniences and washing facilities

G4 (1) Adequate and suitable sanitary conveniences must

be provided in rooms provided to accommodate them or in

bathrooms.


(2) Adequate hand washing facilities must be provided in:

 (a) rooms containing sanitary conveniences; or

 (b) rooms or spaces adjacent to rooms containing sanitary

conveniences.


(3) Any room containing a sanitary convenience, a bidet,

or any facility for washing hands provided in accordance with

paragraph (2)(b), must be separated from any kitchen or any

area where food is prepared.

Limits on application. 

SANITARY CONVENIENCES AND WASHING FACILITIES.

Performance.

In the Secretary of States view Requirement G4

will be met if:

a. Sanitary conveniences of the appropriate

type for the sex and age of the persons

using the building are provided in sufficient

numbers, taking into account the nature of

the building; and

b. hand washing facilities are provided in, or

adjacent to, rooms containing sanitary

conveniences and are sited, designed and

installed so as not to be prejudicial to health.


4.6 Where hot and cold taps are provided

on a sanitary appliance, the hot tap should be

on the left.

Scale of provision and layout

in dwellings.

4.7 Any dwelling (house or flat) should have at

least one sanitary convenience and associated

hand washing facility.


Note: Requirement M4(1) requires that a sanitary

convenience should be located in the principal/

entrance storey of a dwelling.


4.9 To allow for basic hygiene, hand washing

facilities should be located in:

a. the room containing the sanitary

convenience; or

b. an adjacent room or place that provides the

sole means of access to the room containing

the sanitary convenience (provided that it is

not used for the preparation of food).


4.10 A place containing a sanitary

convenience and/or associated hand washing

facilities should be separated by a door from any

place used for the preparation of food (including

a kitchen) (see Diagrams 2 and 3).


The layout for

a room containing a sanitary convenience

only should be such that the room or space

containing its associated hand washing facilities

is accessed before entry to a food preparation

area, and is separated from that area by a door

(Diagram 3).


SANITARY CONVENIENCES AND WASHING FACILITIES.

Scale of provision and layout in

buildings other than dwellings.

4.12 The Workplace (Health, Safety and

Welfare) Regulations 1992 require that a

minimum number of sanitary conveniences

must be provided in workplaces.


This

may be used for those building types not set out

in paragraph 4.12 above or for those workplaces

where the applicant wishes to provide more than the

minimum recommended in the Approved Code of

Practice, for example, to deliver equivalent provision

for men and women.


4.17 A place containing a sanitary

convenience and/or associated hand washing

facilities should be separated by a door from any

place used for the preparation of food (including

a kitchen).


Requirement.

Bathrooms.

G5 A bathroom must be provided containing a wash basin and

either a fixed bath or a shower.


5.5 Where hot and cold taps are provided on

a sanitary appliance, the hot tap should be on

the left.


Scale of provision and layout in

dwellings.

5.6 Any dwelling (house or flat) must have at

least one bathroom with a fixed bath or shower,

and a washbasin.


Scale of provision and layout in

buildings with rooms for residential

purposes.

5.8 The number of fixed baths or showers

and washbasins in buildings with rooms for

residential purposes should be in accordance

with BS 64651:2006 and A1:2009 Sanitary

installations.


Requirement.

Food preparation areas.

G6 A suitable sink must be provided in any area where food

is prepared.


Scale of provision in dwellings.

6.1 A sink should be provided in any kitchen

or place used for the preparation of food.


Scale of provision in buildings other

than dwellings.

6.3 In all buildings other than dwellings,

there should be at least the same provision as

described in 6.1.


Where multiple WCs are specified with

various flushing capacities, the average

effective flushing volume must be used as

set out in paragraphs A8 and A11.


For click taps and other taps with a

water break, the manufacturers stated

full flow rate should be used to perform

calculations (measured as described

above).


Where multiple baths are specified with

various capacities, the average must be

used as set out in paragraphs A8 to A10.


Where no dishwasher is to be provided

and therefore consumption figures are

unknown, a figure of 1.25 litres per place

setting must be assumed.


Where multiple dishwashers are specified

with various consumptions, the average

must be used as set out in paragraphs

A8 to A10.


Where no washing machine is to be

provided and therefore consumption

figures are unknown, a figure of 8.17 litres

per kilogram must be assumed.


Where multiple washing machines are

specified with various consumptions,

the average must be used as set out in

paragraphs A8 to A10.


Where multiple showers are specified with

various flow rates, the average must be

used as set out in paragraphs A8 to A10.


Where present, a standard consumption

of 3.08 litres per person per day must be

assumed.


A3 In some cases rainwater harvesting and

greywater recycling may be used as a means of

reducing water consumption to achieve higher

water efficiency performance levels.


Calculation tables.

A5 Figures from manufacturers product

details should be entered into Table A1 to

calculate the consumption of each fitting in litres

per person per day.


All values throughout

the water efficiency calculator should be rounded

to two decimal places with the exception of the

total water consumption figures, which should be

rounded to one decimal place.


Where terminal fittings with varying flow
rates and capacities are specified (e.g. hot and
cold taps with different flow rates, two types of
shower etc.), the average consumption should be

calculated as set out in Tables A2.1 to A2.7:

a) Enter the full flow rate or volume of each type

of fitting into column (a) of the relevant table.


b) For taps, where there are separate hot and

cold water taps, the flow rate of each tap

should be entered separately as two tap

types to calculate the average flow rate.


A9 Where the average flow rate/volume is

lower than the proportionate flow rate/volume,

the proportionate figure must be entered into

Table A1.


The proportionate figure limits the flow

rate/volume that can be specified to a proportion

equal to 70 per cent of the highest flow rate/

volume.


This is so that, where the average flow

rate/volume is significantly lower than the highest

flow rate/volume specified, the calculation sets a

limitation for what figure can be assumed.


APPENDIX A WATER EFFICIENCY CALCULATOR FOR NEW DWELLINGS.

A11 Where more than one type of WC is

provided, the average effective flushing volume is

calculated using Table A2.7 below.


Where the water

softener achieves a percentage that is equal

to, or lower than this good practice benchmark

figure, zero can be entered into Table A1 of the

calculator for water softeners.


This figure should be

determined from manufacturers product

details.


Where the result indicates zero or a

negative figure, zero should be entered into Table

A1 for water softeners.


The number of occupants

entered into the table should be based on two

in the first bedroom and one in each additional

room.


Greywater calculations.

Greywater demand calculation.

A16 Where all WCs and/or washing machines

are being supplied with greywater, the

consumption values should be copied from

Column 4 of Table A1 and entered into Table A4.6

to calculate the greywater savings.


Where greywater is

only being collected from a proportion of fittings,

such as just some of the taps, the calculations in

Tables A4.3 to A4.5 should be followed and the

results entered into Table A4.6.


Where the greywater supply is greater than

the demand, the greywater savings are equal

to the demand.


Where the demand is greater

than the greywater supply, the savings are

equal to the supply.


APPENDIX A WATER EFFICIENCY CALCULATOR FOR NEW DWELLINGS. 

A20 Where a communal greywater system is

to be provided supplying more than one home,

Tables A4.1 to A4.5 can be used in the same

way.


Rainwater calculations.

Rainwater collection calculations.

A21 Where rainwater is to be used, the

following calculation method should be followed

by entering the relevant details into Table A5.1 or

Table A5.2 to calculate the rainwater collection

volume.


d) Where a communal rainwater system is to

be provided supplying more than one home,

Table A5.1 can be used in the same way

calculating the total volume collected for the

communal system and dividing it by the total

number of occupants served by the system.


However, for sizing of storage

capacity and all other design and installation

details, BS 8515 should be followed.


Rainwater demand calculations

A25 Where all WCs and/or washing

machines are being supplied with rainwater, the

consumption should be taken from Table A1 and

entered into Table A5.5 to calculate the rainwater

savings.


(1) Water supplied:

a. for such domestic purposes as consist

in or include, cooking, drinking, food

preparation or washing; or

b. to premises in which food is produced,

shall, subject to paragraphs (4) and

(5), be regarded as wholesome for the

purposes of Chapter III (quality and

sufficiency of supplies) of Part III (water

supply) of the Water Industry Act 1991,

as it applies to the supply of water for those

domestic purposes, if the requirements

of paragraph (2) are satisfied.


any substance (other than a

parameter listed in Schedule I),

at a concentration or value which

would constitute a potential danger

to human health;

b. that the water does not contain

any substance (whether or not a

parameter) at a concentration or value

which, in conjunction with any other

substance it contains (whether or

not a parameter) would constitute a

potential danger to human health;

c. that the water does not contain

concentrations or values of the

parameters listed in Tables A and

B in Schedule 1 in excess of or,

as the case may be, less than, the

prescribed concentrations or values;

d. that the water satisfies the formula

nitrate/50  nitrite/3 1, where

the square brackets signify the

concentrations in mg/l for nitrate

(NO3

) and nitrite (NO2

(3) The point at which the requirements of

paragraph (2), in so far as they relate to

the parameters set out in Part I of Table

A and in Table B in Schedule 1 are to be

complied with, is:

a. in the case of water supplied from a

tanker, the point at which the water

emerges from the tanker;

b. in any other case, the consumers tap.


(4) Water supplied for regulation 4(1)

purposes shall not be regarded as

wholesome for the purposes of Chapter

III if, on transfer from a treatment works

for supply for those purposes:

a. it contains a concentration of the

coliform bacteria or E. coli parameter

(items 1 and 2 in Part II of Table

A in Schedule 1) in excess of the

prescribed concentrations; or

b. it contains a concentration of nitrite

in excess of 0.1mgNO2.


(5) Subject to paragraph (6), water supplied

for regulation 4(1) purposes shall not be

regarded as wholesome for the purposes

of Chapter III if, on transfer from a service

reservoir for supply for those purposes, it

contains a concentration of the coliform

bacteria or E. coli parameter in excess of

the prescribed concentrations.


(6) Water transferred from a service reservoir

for supply for regulation 4(1) purposes

shall not be regarded as unwholesome for

the purposes of Chapter III because the

maximum concentration for the coliform

bacteria parameter is exceeded if, as

regards the samples taken in any year in

which the reservoir in question is in use,

the results of analysis for that parameter

establish that in at least 95 per cent of

those samples coliforms were absent.