Under regulation 4 of the Building 

Regulations 2010 (as amended), building work 

should be carried out in such a way that, on 

completion of work,

the building complies with the applicable 

Parts of Schedule 1 to the Building 

Regulations,

in the case of an extension or material 

alteration of a building, or the provision, 

extension or material alteration of a controlled 

service or fitting, where it did not comply with 

any such requirement, it is no more 

unsatisfactory in relation to that requirement 

than before the work was carried out.


Where 

there is a material change of use the Building 

Regulations set requirements that must be met 

before the building can be used for its new 

purpose.


a building which contains at least one 

dwelling contains a greater or lesser number 

of dwellings than it did previously.


a building which contains at least one room for  

residential puposes contains a greater or lesser  

number of such rooms than it did previously.


Parts J1 to J4 will apply to all the material 

changes of use mentioned above which means 

that whenever such changes occur the building 

must be brought up to the standards required by 

Parts J1 to J4.


In determining what is appropriate in the 

circumstances, the advice of the local authoritys 

conservation officer should be sought.


In order to join 

such a scheme a person must demonstrate 

competence to carry out the type of work the 

scheme covers, and also the ability to comply 

with all relevant requirements in the Building 

Regulations.


Materials and workmanship

Any building work which is subject to the 

requirements imposed by Schedule 1 to the 

Building Regulations shall be carried out in 

accordance with regulation 7.


This means 

that it is an offence to emit a substantial amount 

of smoke from a chimney of a building, from a 

furnace or from any fixed boiler if located in a 

designated smoke control area.


Requirement J6 applies only to:

(a)  fixed oil storage tanks with capacities greater than 90 litres 

and connecting pipes; and

(b)  fixed  liquefied  petroleum  gas  storage  installations  with 

capacities greater than 150 litres and connecting pipes, which 

are  located  outside  the  building  and  which  serve  fixed 

combustion appliances (including incinerators) in the building.


Combustion appliances shall be so installed that there is an 

adequate  supply  of  air  to  them  for  combustion,  to  prevent 

overheating and for the efficient working of any flue.


Combustion appliances shall have adequate provision for 

the discharge of products of combustion to the outside air.


Where a fixed combustion appliance is provided, appropriate 

provision  shall  be  made  to  detect  and  give  warning  of  the 

release of carbon monoxide.


Combustion appliances and fluepipes shall be so installed, 

and fireplaces and chimneys shall be so constructed and installed, 

as to reduce to a reasonable level the risk of people suffering 

burns or the building catching fire in consequence of their use.


Where  a  hearth,  fireplace,  flue  or  chimney  is  provided 

or  extended,  a  durable  notice  containing  information  on  the 

performance capabilities of the hearth, fireplace, flue or chimney 

shall  be  affixed  in  a  suitable  place  in  the  building  for  the 

purpose of enabling combustion appliances to be safely installed.


Liquid fuel storage systems and the pipes connecting them 

to combustion appliances shall be so constructed and separated 

from buildings and the boundary of the premises as to reduce 

to a reasonable level the risk of the fuel igniting in the event of 

fire in adjacent buildings or premises.


Oil  storage  tanks  and  the  pipes  connecting  them  to 

combustion appliances shall: 

(a)  be so constructed and protected as to reduce to a reasonable 

level the risk of the oil escaping and causing pollution; and

(b)  have affixed in a prominent position a durable notice 

containing information on how to respond to an oil escape so as 

to reduce to a reasonable level the risk of pollution.


Particular reference should be made to:

Approved Document B for guidance on 

compartmentation of buildings for fire safety 

purposes and for appropriate degrees of fire 

resistance for compartment boundaries.


Part J 

does not include specific provisions relating to 

the storage of solid fuel (including solid biofuel) 

but the relevant guidance in Approved Document 

B should be followed.


The designation system in BS EN 1443:2003 

expresses the performance characteristics of 

a chimney or its components, as assessed in 

accordance with an appropriate European 

product standard, by means of a code such 

as EN 1234  T400 N1 D1 Gxx.


The 

equivalent area of a simple ventilator will be 

less than the geometrical free area and for 

complex products may be significantly less.


A fire wall is a means of shielding a fuel tank 

from the thermal radiation from a fire.


For  

LPG tanks, it also ensures that gas accidentally  

leaking from the tank or fittings must travel by 

a longer path and therefore disperse safely, 

before reaching a hazard such as an opening 

in a building, a boundary or other potential 

ignition source.


Typical examples of such materials to be 

found in buildings include totally inorganic 

materials such as concrete, fired clay, 

ceramics, metals, plaster and masonry 

containing not more than 1 per cent by 

weight or volume of organic material.


(Use 

in buildings of combustible metals such as 

magnesiumaluminium alloys should be 

assessed in each individual case.)


A Notified Body, for the purposes of the Gas 

Appliances (Safety) Regulations (1995), means:

a.  a body which is approved by the Secretary of 

State for Trade and Industry as being 

competent to carry out the required Attestation 

procedures for gas appliances and whose 

name and identification number has been 

notified by him/her to the Commission of the 

European Community and to other member 

States in accordance with the Gas Appliances 

(Safety) Regulations (1995);

b.  a body which has been similarly approved for 

the purposes of the Gas Appliances Directive 

by another member State and whose name 

and identification number has been notified to 

the Commission and to other member States 

pursuant to the Gas Appliances Directive.


A roomsealed appliance means an 

appliance whose combustion system is 

sealed from the room in which the appliance 

is located and which obtains air for 

combustion from a ventilated uninhabited 

space within the building or directly from the 

open air outside the building and which vents 

the products of combustion directly to open 

air outside the building (see Diagram 4 (b), (d) 

and (f)).


Solid biofuel means, for the purpose of this 

Approved Document, a solid fuel derived 

from plants and trees.


The size a flue or duct (area, diameter etc) 

Measuring the size of flues 

and ducts

should be measured at right angles to the 

direction in which gases flow.


Where offset 

components are used, they should not reduce 

the flue area to less than the minimum required 

for the combustion appliance (see Diagram 7).


c.  incorporate an appropriate means of warning 

of a release of carbon monoxide for fixed 

appliances that burn solid fuels, gas fuels 

(excluding gas appliances used solely for 

cooking) and oil fuels;

d.  enable normal operation of appliances 

without their causing danger through damage 

by heat or fire to the fabric of the building;

e.  have been inspected and tested to establish 

suitability for the purpose intended;

f.  have been labelled to indicate performance 

capabilities.


The air supply provisions will usually need to be 

increased where a room contains more than one 

appliance (such as a kitchen containing an 

openflued boiler and an openflued cooker).


An open

flued appliance must receive a certain amount of 

air from outside (combustion air in Diagram 8) 

dependent upon its type and rating.


Permanent ventilation of appliance 

compartments

1.5  Appliance compartments that enclose 

openflued combustion appliances should be 

provided with vents large enough to admit all of 

the air required by the appliance for combustion 

and proper flue operation, whether the compartment 

draws its air from a room or directly from outside 

(see Diagram 8 (b) and (c)).


1.6  Where appliances require cooling air, 

appliance compartments should be large enough 

to enable air to circulate and high and lowlevel 

vents should be provided (see Diagram 8 (d), (e), 

(f) and (g)).


1.7  Where appliances are to be installed within 

balanced compartments (see paragraph 0.4(2)), 

special provisions will be necessary and the 

appliance and ventilation system manufacturers 

instructions should be followed.


Permanently open air vents

1.10  Permanently open air vents should be 

nonadjustable, sized to admit sufficient air for 

the purpose intended and positioned where they 

are unlikely to become blocked.


1.12  Where ventilation is to be provided via a 

single proprietary assembly, for example when  

it is proposed to use a proprietary ventilator with 

integral grilles to bridge a cavity wall, the equivalent 

area of the ventilator should be taken as that 

declared by the manufacturer having been 

measured by the method in BS EN 131411:2004.


1.13  Where two or more components are to be 

used to provide a nonproprietary assembly, the 

assembly should be kept as simple and smooth as 

possible.


The assembly should be taken to have 

an equivalent area equal to that of the component 

with the smallest equivalent area in the assembly.


1.14  The equivalent area stated in the ventilator 

manufacturers literature or marked on the air vent 

should be used whenever it is available, as this can 

differ considerably from the free area measured at 

one end of the air vent.


Transfer or connecting ventilation should be at 

low level to reduce the transfer of smoke in the 

event of a fire and otherwise meet the guidance 

given in Approved Document B.


In buildings 

where it is intended to install openflued combustion 

appliances and extract fans, the combustion 

appliances should be able to operate safely whether 

or not the fans are running.


For gas appliances: where a kitchen contains 

an openflued appliance, the extract rate of 

the kitchen extract fan should not exceed 

20 litres/second (72m/hour).


which is established at the time of the test 

(when fans should be on their maximum useable 

setting), and the specific combination causing 

the greatest depressurisation at the appliance 

depends upon the circumstances in each case.


The effect of ceiling fans should be 

checked during the tests.


1.28  Liners should be installed in accordance 

with their manufacturers instructions.


Appropriate 

components should be selected to form the flue 

without cutting and to keep joints to a minimum.


Bends and offsets should be formed only with 

matching factorymade components.


Joints should be sealed 

with fire cement, refractory mortar or installed in 

accordance with their manufacturers instructions.


In the absence of liner manufacturers instructions, 

the space could be filled with a weak insulating 

concrete such as mixtures of:

a.  one part ordinary Portland cement to 20 parts 

suitable lightweight expanded clay aggregate, 

minimally wetted; or

b.  one part ordinary Portland cement to 6 parts 

Vermiculite; or

c.  one part ordinary Portland cement to 10 parts 

Perlite.


Construction of flueblock 

chimneys

1.29  Flueblock chimneys should be constructed 

of factorymade components suitable for the 

intended application installed in accordance with 

the manufacturers instructions.


Ways of meeting 

the requirement for solid fuel appliances (and 

generally suitable for other fuels) include using:

a.  flueblocks whose performance is at least 

equal to that corresponding to the 

designation T400 N2 D 3 G, as described  

in BS EN 1443:2003, such as:

i.  clay flueblocks at least meeting the 

requirements for Class FB1 N2 as 

described in BS EN 1806:2006

ii.


1.30  Joints should be sealed in accordance 

with the flueblock manufacturers instructions.


Bends and offsets should be formed only with 

matching factorymade components.


Flues 

designed to serve more than one appliance can 

meet the requirements by following the guidance 

in BS 54101:1997 for oil and BS 54401:2008 

for gasfired systems.


Construction of masonry 

chimneys

1.27  New masonry chimneys should be 

constructed with flue liners and masonry suitable 

for the intended application.


Liners suitable for 

solid fuel appliances (and generally suitable for 

other fuels) could be:

a.  liners whose performance is at least equal to 

that corresponding to the designation T400 

N2 D 3 G, as described in BS EN 1443:2003, 

such as:

J Combustion appliances and fuel storage systems Approved Document J 

PROVISIONS WHICH APPLY GENERALLY TO

COMBUSTION INSTALLATIONS 

Material change of use

1.31  Where a building is to be altered for 

different use (e.g.


1.33  Fluepipes with spigot and socket joints 

should be fitted with the socket facing upwards 

to contain moisture and other condensates in 

the flue.


Joints should be made gastight.


Building work and 

must not be undertaken without prior notification 

to the local authority.


Anyone in doubt about whether or not any 

renovation, refurbishment or repair work involving 

a flue is notifiable building work, could consult 

the building control department of their local 

authority, or an approved inspector.


Reuse of existing flues

1.36  Where it is proposed to bring a flue in an 

existing chimney back into use or to reuse a flue 

with a different type or rating of appliance, the 

flue and the chimney should be checked and, if 

necessary, altered to ensure that they satisfy the 

requirements for the proposed use.


Before relining flues, they 

should be swept to remove deposits.


Flexible flue liners should be used only to reline a 

chimney and should not be used as the primary 

liner of a new chimney.


Factorymade metal chimneys

1.42  Ways of meeting the requirements when 

proposing factorymade metal chimneys include:

designated in accordance with BS EN1856

1:2003 to suit the appliance and types of fuels 

to be burnt and installing them in accordance 

with the relevant recommendations of  

BS EN 152871:2007;

b.  for gas and for oil appliances where flue 

temperatures will not normally exceed 250C, 

using twinwalled component systems (and, 

for gas, singlewalled component systems) 

appropriately designated in accordance with 

BS EN18561:2003 to suit the appliance and 

types of fuels to be burnt and installing gas 

appliances in accordance with BS 5440

1:2008;

c.  using any other chimney system that is 

suitable for the intended purpose and 

installed in accordance with the relevant 

recommendations in BS EN 152871:2007 or 

BS 54401:2008, as appropriate to the type 

of appliance being installed.


1.43  Where a factorymade metal chimney 

passes through a wall, sleeves should be provided 

to prevent damage to the flue or building through 

thermal expansion.


1.44  When providing a factorymade metal 

chimney, provision should be made to withdraw 

the appliance without the need to dismantle the 

chimney.


1.45  Factorymade metal chimneys should be 

kept a suitable distance away from combustible 

materials.


Ways of meeting the requirement for 

chimneys designated to BS EN 18561:2003 

comprise:

a.  locating the chimney not less than distance 

xx from combustible material, where xx is 

defined in BS EN 18561:2003 as shown in 

Diagram 13;

b.  where a chimney passes through a cupboard, 

storage space or roof space, providing a 

guard placed no closer to the outer wall of 

the chimney than the distance in a) above.


1.46  Where a factorymade metal chimney 

penetrates a fire compartment wall or floor, it 

must not breach the fire separation requirements 

of Part B.


See Approved Document B for more 

guidance but the requirements may be met by:

a.  using a factorymade metal chimney of the 

appropriate level of fire resistance installed in 

accordance with BS EN 18561:2003 Annex 

NA; or

b.  casing the chimney in noncombustible 

material giving at least half the fire resistance 

recommended for the fire compartment wall 

or floor.


J Combustion appliances and fuel storage systems Approved Document J 

PROVISIONS WHICH APPLY GENERALLY TO

COMBUSTION INSTALLATIONS 

Diagram 13   The separation of combustible material from a factorymade metal 

chimney designated to BS EN 18561:2003

Distance xx

distance (xxmm) as

designated to BS EN 18561

Concealed flues

1.47  Where a flue is routed within a void, 

appropriate means of access at strategic 

locations should be provided to allow the 

following aspects to be visually checked and 

confirmed.


It is not intended that the means 

of access should be sized to allow full physical 

access to the flue system.


Any means of access should not impair any 

fire, thermal or acoustic requirements of the 

Building Regulations.


Refer to the relevant 

guidance in Approved Documents B, L and E. 

Where necessary, inspection panels or hatches 

should be fitted with resilient seals and provide 

the similar standards of fire, thermal and acoustic 

isolation to the surrounding structure.


Access hatches should be at least 300mm x 

300mm or larger where necessary to allow 

sufficient access to the void to look along the 

length of the flue.


JApproved Document J Combustion appliances and fuel storage systemsJ 

PROVISIONS WHICH APPLY GENERALLY TO 

COMBUSTION INSTALLATIONS

Diagram 14   Example locations of access panels for concealed horizontal flues

Flue terminal

Flue terminal

External wall

Inspection hatch

Inspection hatch

Any intervening joints

to be visible within 

1.5m of an inspection

hatch

Any intervening joints

to be visible within 

1.5m of an inspection

hatch

Accessible

flue connection

Inspection hatch

Concealed

flue connection

Boiler A

Boiler B

Inspection hatch

All voids containing concealed flues should have at least one inspection hatch

measuring at least 300mm square.


No flue joint within the void should be more than 1.5m distant from the edge of 

the nearest inspection hatch, i.e.


dimension x in the diagram should be less than 1.5m.


Where possible inspection hatches should be located at changes of direction.


Where this is not possible then bends should be viewable from both directions.


A way 

of meeting the requirement would be to build 

flues so that they are straight and vertical except 

for the connections to combustion appliances 

with rear outlets where the horizontal section 

should not exceed 150mm.


Where bends are 

essential, they should be angled at no more than 

45 to the vertical.


1.49  Provisions should be made to enable flues 

to be swept and inspected.


A way of making 

reasonable provision would be to limit the 

number of changes of direction between the 

combustion appliance outlet and the flue outlet 

to not more than four (each up to 45), with not 

more than two of these being between an 

intended point of access for sweeping and either 

another point of access for sweeping or the flue 

outlet.


(90 factorymade bends, elbows or Tee 

pieces in fluepipes may be treated as being equal 

to two 45 bends (see Diagram 15)).


1.51  Openings for inspection and cleaning 

should be formed using purpose factorymade 

components compatible with the flue system, 

having an access cover that has the same level 

of gastightness as the flue system and an equal 

level of thermal insulation.


After the 

appliance has been installed, it should be 

possible to sweep the whole flue.


A way of achieving this where 

owners of adjacent land could build up to the 

boundary would be to adopt the suggestions in 

Diagram 34 or 41, as relevant.


Dry lining around fireplace 

openings

1.53  Where a decorative treatment, such as 

a fireplace surround, masonry cladding or dry 

lining, is provided around a fireplace opening, 

any gaps that could allow flue gases to escape 

from the fireplace opening into the void behind 

the decorative treatment should be sealed to 

prevent such leakage.


The sealing material 

should be capable of remaining in place despite 

any relative movement between the decorative 

treatment and the fireplace recess.


In order to document the steps taken to achieve 

compliance with the requirements, a report 

should be drawn up showing that materials and 

components appropriate to the intended 

application have been used and that flues have 

passed appropriate tests.


JApproved Document J Combustion appliances and fuel storage systemsJ 

PROVISIONS WHICH APPLY GENERALLY TO 

COMBUSTION INSTALLATIONS

1.55  Flues should be checked at completion 

to show that they are free from obstructions, 

satisfactorily gastight and constructed with 

materials and components of sizes which suit 

the intended application.


A spillage test to 

check for compliance with J2 should be carried 

out with the appliance under fire, as part of 

the process of commissioning to check for 

compliance with Part L, and (in relevant cases) 

as required by the Gas Safety (Installation and 

Use) Regulations.


1.56  Hearths should be constructed with 

materials and components of sizes to suit the 

intended application and should show the area 

where combustible materials should not intrude.


Notice plates for hearths and flues 

(Requirement J5)

1.57  Where a hearth, fireplace (including a flue 

box), flue or chimney is provided or extended 

(including cases where a flue is provided as part 

of the refurbishment work), information essential 

to the correct application and use of these 

facilities should be permanently posted in the 

building.


1.58  Notice plates should be robust, indelibly 

marked and securely fixed in an unobtrusive but 

obvious position within the building such as:

a.  next to the electricity consumer unit; or

b.  next to the chimney or hearth described; or

c.  next to the water supply stopcock.


Access to combustion appliances 

for maintenance

1.60  There should be a permanent means of 

safe access to appliances for maintenance.


Flues should be at least the size shown in 

Table 2 relevant to the particular appliance, and 

not less than the size of the appliance flue outlet 

or that recommended by the appliance 

manufacturer.


Any room or space containing an 

appliance should have a permanent air vent 

opening of at least the size shown in Table 1.


For 

appliances designed to burn a range of different 

solid fuels the air supply should be designed to 

accommodate burning the fuel that produces the 

highest heating output.


In these cases, manufacturers 

installation instructions should be followed 

subject to any minimum ventilation provisions  

of this Approved Document.


Permanently open air vent(s) with a total equivalent area of at least 50 of the cross 

sectional area of the flue.


Permanently open air vent(s) with a total equivalent area of at least 50 of the throat 

opening area.


Example: an appliance with a flue draught stabiliser and a rated output of 7kW would require an equivalent area of: 5 x 300  2 x 850  3200mm2 

It is unlikely that a dwelling constructed prior to 2008 will have an air permeability of less than 5.0m3/(h.m2) at 50 Pa unless extensive measures have 

been taken to improve airtightness.


Table 2  Size of flues in chimneys

Installation (1)

Minimum flue size

Fireplace with an opening of up to 500mm x 550mm

200mm diameter or rectangular/square flues having the same cross

sectional area and a minimum dimension not less than 175mm

Fireplace with an opening in excess of 500mm x 

550mm or a fireplace exposed on two or more sides

See paragraph 2.7.


If rectangular/square flues are used the minimum 

dimension should be not less than 200mm

Closed appliance of up to 20kW rated output which: 

burns smokeless or lowvolatiles fuel (2) 

 is an appliance which meets the requirements of 

the Clean Air Act when burning an appropriate 

bituminous coal (3)

 is an appliance which meets the requirements of 

the Clean Air Act when burning wood (3) 

Pellet burner or pellet boiler which meets the 

requirements of the Clean Air Act (3)

125mm diameter or rectangular/square flues having the same cross

sectional area and a minimum dimension not less than 100mm for straight 

flues or 125mm for flues with bends or offsets

125mm diameter 

This may be reduced to no less than 100mm when permitted by the 

appliance manufacturer and supported by calculation according to BS EN 

133841:2002.


Other closed appliance of up to 30kW rated output 

burning any fuel

150mm diameter or rectangular/square flues having the same cross

sectional area and a minimum dimension not less than 125mm

Closed appliance of above 30kW and up to 50kW rated 

output burning any fuel

175mm diameter or rectangular/square flues having the same cross

sectional area and a minimum dimension not less than 150mm

Notes:

1.


For fireplaces with openings larger than 

500mm x 550mm or fireplaces exposed on two 

or more sides (such as a fireplace under a canopy 

or open on both sides of a central chimney 

breast) a way of showing compliance would be to 

provide a flue with a crosssectional area equal 

to 15 per cent of the total face area of the 

fireplace opening(s) (see Appendix B).


However, 

specialist advice should be sought when 

proposing to construct flues having an area of:

a.  more than 15 per cent of the total face area of 

the fireplace openings; or

b.  more than 120,000mm (0.12m).


Flues should be high enough to ensure 

Height of flues

sufficient draught to clear the products of 

combustion.


However, a minimum flue 

height of 4.5m could be satisfactory if the 

guidance in Paragraphs 2.10 to 2.12 is adopted.


The 

highest point of air entry into the fireplace could 

be the top of the fireplace opening or, for a fire 

under a canopy, the bottom of the canopy.


Outlets from flues

2.10  The outlet from a flue should be above 

the roof of the building in a position where the 

products of combustion can discharge freely and 

will not present a fire hazard, whatever the wind 

conditions.


The chimney heights and/

or separations shown may need to be increased 

in particular cases where wind exposure, 

surrounding tall buildings, high trees or high 

ground could have adverse effects on flue draught.


J Combustion appliances and fuel storage systems Approved Document J 

ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS FOR APPLIANCES BURNING SOLID 

FUEL WITH A RATED OUTPUT UP TO 50kW 

Diagram 17   Flue outlet positions for solid fuel appliances

Adjacent building

Regulated building

Point where flue passes through 

weather surface (Notes 1, 2)

A At or within 600mm of the 

ridge

B Elsewhere on a roof 

(whether pitched or flat)

C Below (on a pitched roof) or 

within 2300mm horizontally 

to an openable rooflight, 

dormer window or other 

opening (Note 3)

D Within 2300mm of an 

adjoining or adjacent 

building, whether or not 

beyond the boundary 

(Note 3)

Notes

Clearances to flue outlet

At least 600mm above the 

ridge

At least 2300mm horizontally 

from the nearest point on the 

weather surface and:

a) at least 1000mm above the 

highest point of intersection 

of the chimney and the 

weather surface; or

b) at least as high as the 

ridge.


2)  A flat roof has a pitch less than 10.


4)   A vertical flue fixed to an outside wall should be treated as 

equivalent to an inside flue emerging at the nearest edge of the 

roof.


Location and shielding of 

connecting fluepipes

2.14  Connecting fluepipes should be used only 

to connect appliances to their chimneys.


Connecting 

fluepipes should also be guarded if they could 

be at risk of damage or if the burn hazard they 

present to people is not immediately apparent.


2.15  Connecting fluepipes should be located so 

as to avoid igniting combustible material.


Ways 

of meeting the requirement include minimising 

horizontal and sloping runs and:

a.  following the guidance in Paragraph 1.45 

where the connecting fluepipe is a factory

made metal chimney whose performance is 

at least equal to designation T400 N2 D3 G 

according to BS EN 18561:2003 or BS EN 

18562:2004, and installed to BS EN 15827

1; or

b.  separation by shielding in accordance with 

Diagram 19.


Debris collection space

2.16  Where a chimney cannot be cleaned 

through the appliance, a debris collecting space 

which is accessible for emptying and suitably 

sized opening(s) for cleaning should be provided 

at appropriate locations in the chimney.


Masonry and flueblock chimneys

2.17  Masonry chimneys should be built in 

accordance with Paragraphs 1.27 and 1.28.


Flueblock chimneys should be built in 

accordance with Paragraphs 1.29 and 1.30.


The minimum chimney thickness and distance 

to combustibles (xxmm) should be no less than 

the manufacturers product declaration (Gxx) 

based on testing to BS EN 1858:2008 (concrete 

flue blocks) or BS EN 1806:2006 (clay/ceramic 

flueblocks).


Other masonry chimney products 

should exceed the minimum thickness indicated 

in Diagram 20.


JApproved Document J Combustion appliances and fuel storage systemsJ 

ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS FOR APPLIANCES BURNING SOLID 

FUEL WITH A RATED OUTPUT UP TO 50kW

Diagram 20   Wall thicknesses for masonry and flueblock chimneys

Separation of combustible 

material from fireplaces and 

masonry flues

2.18  Combustible material should not be 

located where it could be ignited by the heat 

dissipating through the walls of fireplaces or 

masonry flues.


A way of meeting the requirement 

would be to follow the guidance in Diagram 21 so 

that combustible material is at least:

a.


200mm from the inside surface of a flue or 

fireplace recess; or

b.  at least xxmm from a flue product with 

designated separation distance (Gxx); or

c.  40mm from the outer surface of a masonry 

chimney or fireplace recess unless it is a 

floorboard, skirting board, dado or picture 

rail, mantelshelf or architrave.


Metal fixings 

in contact with combustible materials should 

be at least 50mm from the inside surface of 

a flue.


Lining and relining of flues in 

chimneys

2.20  Lining or relining flues may be building 

work and, in any case, such work should be 

carried out so that the objectives of J2 to J5 are 

met (see Paragraphs 1.34 and 1.35).


Existing 

flues being reused should be checked as 

described in Paragraph 1.36.


Ways of meeting 

the requirements include the use of:

a.  liners whose performance is at least equal to 

that corresponding to the designation T400 

N2 D3 G, as described in BS EN 1443:2003, 

such as:

factorymade flue lining systems 

manufactured to BS EN 18561:2003 or 

BS EN 18562:2004.

ii.


J Combustion appliances and fuel storage systems Approved Document J 

ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS FOR APPLIANCES BURNING SOLID 

FUEL WITH A RATED OUTPUT UP TO 50kW 

Diagram 21   Minimum separation distances from combustible material in or  

near a chimney 

Table 3   Minimum performance 

designations for chimney and 

fluepipe components for 

use with new solid fuel fired 

appliances

Appliance 

Minimum 

designation

Fuel type

All solid fuel 

appliances

Masonry or flueblock 

flue with liner to T400 

N2 D3 Gxx

Coal, Smokeless 

Fuel, Peat, wood 

and other biomass

Clay flue blocks 

FB1N2

Clay/ceramic liners 

Concrete liners B2

Factory made metal 

chimneys to T400 N2 

D3 Gxx

See paragraph 1.271.29 and 1.42

Formation of gathers

2.21  To minimise resistance to the proper 

working of flues, tapered gathers should be 

provided in fireplaces for open fires.


JApproved Document J Combustion appliances and fuel storage systemsJ 

ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS FOR APPLIANCES BURNING SOLID 

FUEL WITH A RATED OUTPUT UP TO 50kW

Diagram 22   Construction of fireplace gathers

Diagram 23   Canopy for an open solid fuel fire

J Combustion appliances and fuel storage systems Approved Document J 

ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS FOR APPLIANCES BURNING SOLID 

FUEL WITH A RATED OUTPUT UP TO 50kW 

Hearths

2.22  Hearths should be constructed of suitably 

robust materials and to appropriate dimensions 

such that, in normal use, they prevent combustion 

appliances setting fire to the building fabric and 

furnishings, and they limit the risk of people being 

accidentally burnt.


The hearth should be able to accommodate  

the weight of the appliance and its chimney if the 

chimney is not independently supported.


2.23  Appliances should stand wholly above:

a.  hearths made of noncombustible board/

sheet material or tiles at least 12mm thick, if 

the appliance is not to stand in an appliance 

recess and has been tested to an applicable 

appliance standard to verify that it cannot 

cause the temperature of the upper surface 

of the hearth to exceed 100C; or

b.  constructional hearths in accordance with the 

paragraphs below.


2.24  Constructional hearths should:

a.  have plan dimensions as shown in Diagram 

24; and

b.  be made of solid, noncombustible material, 

such as concrete or masonry, at least 125mm 

thick, including the thickness of any non

combustible floor and/or decorative surface.


2.25  Combustible material should not be 

placed beneath constructional hearths unless 

there is an airspace of at least 50mm between 

the underside of the hearth and the combustible 

material, or the combustible material is at 

least 250mm below the top of the hearth (see 

Diagram 25).


Components should be supplied as sets for 

assembly and jointing in accordance with the 

manufacturers instructions.


2.26  An appliance should be located on a 

hearth so that it is surrounded by a surface free 

of combustible material as shown in Diagram 26.


The boundary of this surface should be 

visually apparent to provide a warning to the 

building occupants and to discourage combustible 

floor finishes such as carpet from being laid too 

close to the appliance.


2.27  Dimensions shown in Diagram 26 may be 

reduced to manufacturers recommendations for 

appliances with surface temperatures not 

exceeding 85C when in normal operation and 

where there is no risk of spillage of fuel or ash.


2.28  Combustible material placed on or beside 

a constructional hearth should not extend under 

a superimposed hearth by more than 25mm or to 

closer than 150mm measured horizontally to the 

appliance.


Thinner material could be used provided it 

gives the same overall level of protection as the 

solid noncombustible material.


2.33  Clearances shown in Diagram 30 may be 

reduced to manufacturers recommendations for 

appliances with surface temperatures not 

exceeding 85C when in normal operation.


J Combustion appliances and fuel storage systems Approved Document J 

ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS FOR APPLIANCES BURNING SOLID 

FUEL WITH A RATED OUTPUT UP TO 50kW 

Carbon monoxide alarms

2.34  Where a new or replacement fixed solid 

fuel appliance is installed in a dwelling, a carbon 

monoxide alarm should be provided in the room 

where the appliance is located.


2.36  The carbon monoxide alarm should be 

located in the same room as the appliance:

a.  on the ceiling at least 300mm from any wall 

or, if it is located on a wall, as high up as 

possible (above any doors and windows) but 

not within 150mm of the ceiling; and

b.  between 1m and 3m horizontally from the 

appliance.


Diagram 29   Open fireplaces: throat and fireplace components

 JApproved Document J Combustion appliances and fuel storage systemsJ 

ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS FOR APPLIANCES BURNING SOLID 

FUEL WITH A RATED OUTPUT UP TO 50kW

Diagram 30   Wall adjacent to hearths

J Combustion appliances and fuel storage systems Approved Document J 

Section 3: Additional provisions for gas 

burning appliances with a rated input up to 

70kW (net)

Gas Safety (Installation and Use) 

Regulations

All combustion installations must be 

accommodated in ways that meet the requirements 

of the Building Regulations.


Any gas engineering business, 

whether an employer or self employed, must be a 

member of a class of persons approved by the 

Health and Safety Executive (HSE).


The following 

paragraphs give builders and lay readers an 

outline of some of the main requirements of the 

Gas Safety (Installation and Use) Regulations, but 

for further information reference should be made 

to the Health and Safety Commissions Approved 

Code of Practice (see below) or Building Control 

Bodies.


The Gas Safety (Installation and Use) 

Regulations require that (a) gas fittings, appliances 

and gas storage vessels must be installed only 

by a person with the required competence and 

(b) any person having control to any extent of gas 

work must ensure that the person carrying out 

that work has the required competence and (c) 

any gas installation businesses, whether an 

employer or selfemployed, must be a member of 

a class of persons approved by the HSE; for the 

time being this means they must be registered 

with Gas Safe Register.


The Regulations may be 

amended from time to time and whichever 

Regulations are currently in force at the time 

an installation is carried out must be complied 

with.


Important 

elements of the Regulations include that:

a.  any appliance installed in a room used or 

intended to be used as a bath or shower 

room must be of the roomsealed type;

b.  a gas fire, other gas space heater or gas 

water heater of more than 14kW (gross) heat 

input (12.7kW (net) heat input) must not be 

installed in a room used or intended to be 

used as sleeping accommodation unless the 

appliance is room sealed;

c.  a gas fire, other space heater or gas water 

heater of up to 14kW (gross) heat input 

(12.7kW (net) heat input) must not be 

installed in a room used or intended to be 

used as sleeping accommodation unless it 

is room sealed or equipped with a device 

designed to shut down the appliance before 

there is a buildup of a dangerous quantity 

of the products of combustion in the room 

concerned;

d.  the restrictions in (a)(c) above also apply in 

respect of any cupboard or compartment 

within the rooms concerned, and to any 

cupboard, compartment or space adjacent 

to, and with an air vent into, such a room;

instantaneous water heaters (installed in any 

room) must be room sealed or have fitted a 

safety device to shut down the appliance as 

in (c) above;

f.  precautions must be taken to ensure that all 

installation pipework, gas fittings, appliances 

and flues are installed safely.


When any gas 

appliance is installed, checks are required for 

ensuring compliance with the Regulations, 

including the effectiveness of the flue, the 

supply of combustion air, the operating 

pressure or heat input (or where necessary 

both), and the operation of the appliance to 

ensure its safe functioning;

g.  any flue must be installed in a safe position 

and must be adequate, suitable and effective 

for use with the appliance which it serves;

 JApproved Document J Combustion appliances and fuel storage systems 

ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS FOR GAS BURNING APPLIANCES 

WITH A RATED INPUT UP TO 70kW (net)

h.  no alteration is allowed to any premises in 

which a gas fitting or gas storage vessel is 

fitted which would adversely affect the safety 

of that fitting or vessel, causing it no longer to 

comply with the Regulations;

i.  LPG storage vessels and LPGfired appliances 

fitted with automatic ignition devices or pilot 

lights must not be installed in cellars or 

basements.


Diagram 31   Types of gas fire

J Combustion appliances and fuel storage systems Approved Document J 

ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS FOR GAS BURNING APPLIANCES 

WITH A RATED INPUT UP TO 70kW (net) 

3.12 

In dwellings with an air permeability 

greater than 5.0 m3/hr/m2 (see Appendix F), 

permanently open air vents may not be necessary 

for DFE fires with ratings not exceeding 7kW (net) 

that have a flue gas clearance rate (without 

spilling) not exceeding 70 m3/hour.


3.16  A room containing a gas point intended for 

use with a flueless appliance (such as a gas point 

for a cooker or a gas point for a space or water 

heater, the gas point not being adjacent to a flue) 

should have the ventilation provision required for 

the installation of that appliance (calculated on 

the basis that an appliance with the largest rating 

consistent with the table to Diagram 33 could be 

installed there).


The Gas Appliances (Safety) 

Regulations 1995 require that particular 

combinations of appliance, flue box (where 

required) and flue must be selected from those 

stated in the manufacturers instructions as 

having been shown to be safe by a Notified 

Body.


A flueless instantaneous water heater 

should not be installed in a room or space having 

a volume of less than 5 m.

Air supply to gas fires and  

other appliances

3.10  A way of meeting the requirements would 

be to follow the general guidance given in 

Section 1, beginning at Paragraph 1.2, in 

conjunction with the guidance below.


Flued Decorative Fuel Effect  

(DFE) fires

3.11  Any room or space intended to contain a 

DFE fire should have permanently open air vents 

as described in (a) or (b) below, unless the 

installation is in accordance with Paragraph 3.12:

a.  for a DFE fire in a fireplace recess with a 

throat, the air vent equivalent area should be 

at least 10,000mm (100cm)

b.  for a DFE fire in a fireplace with no throat, 

such as a fire under a canopy, the air vent 

should be sized in accordance with Section 2 

of this Approved Document, as if the room 

were intended to contain a solid fuel fire  

(see Table 1).


In older dwellings with an air permeability which is more than 5.0m3/h/m2 the first 7kW(net) can be ignored.


An internal space here means one which communicates with several other rooms or spaces.


Example: for a space heater in a lounge measuring 4m x 4m x 2.4m ( 38.4m3), the appliance rated input should not 

exceed 38.4 x 0.045  1.73kW (net).


If an existing flue is to be used it should be 

3.18 

checked in accordance with Paragraph 1.36.


3.19  For appliances that are CE marked as 

compliant with the Gas Appliances (Safety) 

Regulations, flues should be sized in accordance 

with the manufacturers installation instructions.


3.20  Connecting fluepipes should be the same 

size in terms of diameter and/or equivalent 

crosssectional area as the appliance flue outlet.


The chimney flue should have at least the same 

crosssectional area as that of the appliance  

flue outlet.


Some ILFE and DFE appliances require a circular flue of at least 125mm diameter.


Height of natural draught flues  

for openflued appliances

3.21  Flues should be high enough to ensure 

sufficient draught to safely clear the products of 

combustion.


Outlets from flues

3.23  Outlets from flues should be so situated 

externally as to allow the dispersal of products of 

combustion and, if a balanced flue, the intake of 

air.


Whilst this nuisance is 

not considered to be within the scope of building 

regulations, such installations could be 

considered as a Statutory Nuisance as set out 

in the Environmental Protection Act.


For 

any other terminal, 

as given in 

BS 54401:2008

Above the highest point of 

intersection with the roof

Site in 

accordance with 

manufacturers 

instructions

Site in 

accordance with 

BS 54401:2008

Notes:

 An opening here means an openable element, such as an openable window, or a fixed opening such as an air vent.


N/A means not applicable.


J Combustion appliances and fuel storage systems Approved Document J 

ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS FOR GAS BURNING APPLIANCES 

WITH A RATED INPUT UP TO 70kW (net) 

Diagram 35   Location of outlets near roof windows from flues serving gas appliances

3.24  Flue outlets should be protected where 

flues are at significant risk of blockage.


3.25  Flues serving natural draught openflued 

appliances should be fitted with outlet terminals if 

the flue diameter is no greater than 170mm.


The risk of blockage of flues of more than 

170mm diameter should be assessed in the light 

of local conditions.


In areas where nests of 

squirrels or jackdaws are likely, the fitting of a 

protective cage designed for solid fuel use and 

having a mesh size no larger than 25mm (but 

no smaller than 6mm) may be an acceptable 

provision if the total free area of its outlet 

openings is at least twice the crosssectional 

area of the flue.


3.26  A flue outlet should be protected with a 

guard if persons could come into contact with it 

or if it could be damaged.


If a flue outlet is in a 

vulnerable position, such as where the flue 

discharges within reach from the ground, or a 

balcony, veranda or a window, it should be 

designed to prevent the entry of any matter that 

could obstruct the flow of flue gases.


Provision of flues

3.27  Satisfactory provision of chimneys and 

fluepipes for gas appliances may be achieved by:

a.  following the guidance on the selection of 

components and the manner of their 

installation as given in Paragraphs 3.28 to 

3.35 and the references to Section 1; or (if  

the intended appliance is new and of  

known type)

or (if the intended appliance is new and of  

known type):

b.  i)  using factorymade components that 

achieve a performance at least equal to 

that corresponding to the designation 

given in Table 6 for the intended appliance 

type when tested to an appropriate 

European chimney standard (BS EN); and

ii)  installing these components in accordance 

with the guidance in Paragraphs 3.28 to 

3.35 and Section 1, as relevant, and in 

accordance with the appliance manufacturers 

and component manufacturers 

installation instructions.


Masonry chimneys

3.29  Masonry chimneys should be built in 

accordance with Paragraphs 1.27 and 1.28 in 

Section 1.


They can 

also be constructed from factorymade flueblock 

systems comprising straight blocks, recess units, 

lintel blocks, offset blocks, transfer blocks and 

jointing materials complying with:

a.  BS EN 18581:2003 for concrete flueblocks of 

at least class D2; or

b.  BS EN 1806:2006 for clay/ceramic flueblocks 

with a performance class of at least FB4 N2.


3.31  Flueblock chimneys should be installed 

with sealed joints in accordance with the 

flueblock manufacturers installation instructions.


Where bends or offsets are required, these 

should be formed using matching factorymade 

components.


Factory

made metal chimneys should be guarded if they 

could be at risk of damage or the burn hazard 

they present to people is not immediately apparent.


Location and shielding of flues

3.33  Combustible materials in the building 

fabric should be protected from the heat 

dissipation from flues so that they are not at risk 

of catching fire.


3.34  Where a fluepipe or chimney penetrates a 

fire compartment wall or floor, it must not breach 

the fire separation requirements of Part B.


Table 7   Protecting buildings from 

hot flues

Flue within

Protection measures

Connecting fluepipe

Factorymade 

chimney appropriately 

designated to BS EN 

18561:2003

Flues should be at least 25mm 

from any combustible material 

(measured from the outer surface 

of the flue wall, or the outer 

surface of the inner wall in the 

case of multiwalled products).


(The air

space could be wholly or partially 

filled with noncombustible 

insulating material).


Masonry chimney

Provide at least 25mm of 

masonry between flues and 

any combustible material.


Flueblock chimney

Provide flueblock walls at least 

25mm thick.


3.35  Connecting fluepipes and factorymade 

chimneys should also be guarded if they could 

be at risk of damage or if they present a burn 

hazard to people that is not immediately apparent

Relining of flues in chimneys

3.36  Lining or relining flues may be building 

work and, in any case, such work should be 

carried out so that the objectives of requirements 

J2 to J5 are met (see Paragraphs 1.34 and 1.35).


Existing flues being reused should be checked 

as described in Paragraph 1.36.


3.37  Flexible metal flue liners should be 

installed in one complete length without joints 

within the chimney.


Other than for sealing at the 

top and the bottom, the space between the 

chimney and the liner should be left empty unless 

this is contrary to the manufacturers instructions.


Doubleskin flexible flue liners should be installed 

in accordance with the manufacturers installation 

instructions.


BS 715 liners should be installed in 

accordance with BS 54401:2008.


Combustion appliances and fuel storage systems Approved Document J 

ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS FOR GAS BURNING APPLIANCES 

WITH A RATED INPUT UP TO 70kW (net) 

Diagram 36   Bases for back boilers (installation using a proprietary back boiler 

enclosure shown)

Debris collection space  

for chimneys

3.38  A debris collection space should be 

provided at the base of a flue unless it is lined, or 

constructed of flue blocks, or is a factorymade 

metal chimney with a flue box.


This can be 

achieved by providing a space having a volume 

of not less than 12 litres and a depth of at least 

250mm below the point where flue gases 

discharge into the chimney.


For gas 

fires of the type illustrated in Diagram 31 (a) and 

(b), there should be at least 50mm clearance 

between the end of the appliance flue outlet 

and any surface.


JApproved Document J Combustion appliances and fuel storage systemsJ 

ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS FOR GAS BURNING APPLIANCES 

WITH A RATED INPUT UP TO 70kW (net)

Diagram 37   Hearths for decorative fuel effect (DFE) and inset live fuel effect (ILFE) 

fires: minimum plan dimensions of noncombustible surfaces

Shielding of appliances

3.42  Gasfired appliances should be located 

where accidental contact is unlikely and 

surrounded by a noncombustible surface which 

provides adequate separation from combustible 

materials.


An alternative approach would be to protect 

combustible fabric with:

a.  a shield of noncombustible material, such as 

insulating board, with a fireresistant surface; or

b.  an air space of at least 75mm (see Diagram 39).


Hearths

3.40  Appliances should be placed on hearths 

unless:

a.  they are to be installed so that every part of 

any flame or incandescent material will be at 

least 225mm above the floor; or

b.  the manufacturers instructions state that a 

hearth is not required.


Hearths should comprise at 

least a (top) layer of noncombustible, nonfriable 

material not less than 12mm thick.


The edges of 

hearths should be marked to provide a warning 

to the building occupants and to discourage 

combustible floor finishes such as carpet from 

being laid too close to the appliance.


J Combustion appliances and fuel storage systems Approved Document J 

ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS FOR GAS BURNING APPLIANCES 

WITH A RATED INPUT UP TO 70kW (net) 

Diagram 38   Hearths for other appliances: 

plan dimension of non 

combustible surfaces

At least 150mm

or to a suitably

heatresistant wall

Hearth

surface

free of

combustible

material

At least

225mm

beyond

front

Diagram 39   Shielding of appliances

Alternative approach

The requirements may also be met by adopting 

the relevant recommendations in the publications 

listed below to achieve an equivalent level of 

performance to that obtained by following the 

guidance in this Approved Document:

BS 5440 Installation and maintenance of flues 

and ventilation for gas appliances of rated input 

not exceeding 70kW net (1st, 2nd and 3rd family 

gases), Part 1:2008 Specification for installation 

and maintenance of flues; Part 2:2009 

Specification for installation and maintenance 

of ventilation for gas appliances.


BS 5546:2000 Specification for installation of 

hot water supplies for domestic purposes, 

using gasfired appliances of rated input not 

exceeding 70kW.


BS 5864:2004 Specification for installation in 

domestic premises of gasfired ductedair 

heaters of rated input not exceeding 60kW.


BS 5871 Specification for installation of gas fires, 

convector heaters, fire/back boilers and 

decorative fuel effect gas appliances, Part 1:2005 

Gas fires, convector heaters and fire/back boilers 

and heating stoves (1st, 2nd and 3rd family 

gases); Part 2:2005 Inset live fuel effect gas fires 

of heat input not exceeding 15kW and fire/back 

boilers (2nd and 3rd family gases); Part 3:2005 

Decorative fuel effect gas appliances of heat input 

not exceeding 20kW (2nd and 3rd family gases).


BS 6798:2009 Specification for installation of 

gasfired boilers of rated input not exceeding 

70kW net.


Carbon monoxide alarms

3.43  Where a new or replacement fixed gas 

burning appliance (excluding gas appliances used 

solely for cooking) is installed in a dwelling, a 

carbon monoxide alarm should be provided in 

the room where the appliance is located.


3.45  The carbon monoxide alarm should be 

located in the same room as the appliance:

 on the ceiling at least 300mm from any wall or, 

if it is located on a wall, as high up as possible 

(above any doors and windows) but not within 

150mm of the ceiling; and

b.  between 1m and 3m horizontally from the 

appliance.


An example calculation illustrating 

the use of this guidance is given in Appendix D. 

Where manufacturers installation instructions 

require greater areas of permanently open air 

vents than those shown in Diagram 40, the 

manufacturers advice should be followed.


A way of meeting the requirements 

would be to use:

Flues should be sized to suit the intended 

a.  connecting fluepipes of the same size as the 

appliance flue outlet; and

b.  flues in chimneys of the same crosssectional 

area as the appliance flue outlet.


Outlets from flues and flue heights

The outlet from a flue should be so 

situated externally as to ensure: the correct 

operation of a natural draught flue; the intake of 

air if a balanced flue; and dispersal of the 

products of combustion.


A way of meeting the requirement could 

be to follow the guidance in Diagram 41.


The 

separations given in the Table to Diagram 41 are 

minimum values that may have to be increased 

where there is a risk that local factors such as 

wind patterns could disrupt the operation of the 

flue or where a natural draught flue would not be 

tall enough to clear the products of combustion 

of an openflued appliance.


For flues in proximity 

to roof windows the minimum separation 

distances identified in Diagram 35 should be 

applied.


Whilst this nuisance is 

not considered to be within the scope of building 

regulations, such installations could be 

considered as a Statutory Nuisance as set out 

in the Environmental Protection Act.


Flue outlets should be protected with 

terminal guards if persons could come into 

contact with them or if they could be damaged.


If a flue outlet is in a vulnerable position, such as 

where the flue discharges at a point within reach 

of the ground, balcony, veranda or a window, it 

should be designed to prevent the entry of any 

matter that could obstruct the flow.


In older dwellings with an air permeability which is more than 5.0m3/hr/m2 the first 5kW(net) can be ignored.


JApproved Document J Combustion appliances and fuel storage systemsADDITIONAL PROVISIONS FOR OIL BURNING APPLIANCES 

WITH A RATED OUTPUT UP TO 45kW

Diagram 41   Location of outlets from flues serving oilfired appliances

Table to Diagram 41   Location of outlets from flues serving oilfired appliances

Minimum separation distances for terminals in mm

Location of outlet (1)

Appliance with 

pressure jet burner

Appliance with 

vaporising burner

Below an opening (2, 3)

Horizontally to an opening (2, 3)

Below a plastic/painted gutter, drainage pipe or eaves if combustible material 

protected (4)

Below a balcony or a plastic/painted gutter, drainage pipe or eaves without 

protection to combustible material

From vertical sanitary pipework

From an external or internal corner or from a surface or boundary alongside 

the terminal

Above ground or balcony level

From a surface or boundary facing the terminal

From a terminal facing the terminal

Vertically from a terminal on the same wall

Horizontally from a terminal on the same wall

Above the highest point of an intersection with the roof

From a vertical structure to the side of the terminal

Above a vertical structure which is less than 750mm (pressure jet burner) or 

2300mm (vaporising burner) horizontally from the side of the terminal

From a ridge terminal to a vertical structure on the roof

600 (6)

750 (6)

600 (6)

Notes:

Should not be used

Should not be used

Should not be used

Should not be used

Should not be used

Should not be used

Should not be used

Should not be used

Should not be used

Should not be used

Should not be used

1000 (5)

1000 (5)

Should not be used

1.


An opening means an openable element, such as an openable window, or a permanent opening such as a permanently open air vent.


Notwithstanding the dimensions above, a terminal should be at least 300mm from combustible material, e.g.


A way of providing protection of combustible material would be to fit a heat shield at least 750mm wide.


Where a terminal is used with a vaporising burner, the terminal should be at least 2300mm horizontally from the roof.


Outlets for vertical balanced flues in locations M, N and O should be in accordance with manufacturers instructions.


J Combustion appliances and fuel storage systems Approved Document J 

ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS FOR OIL BURNING APPLIANCES 

WITH A RATED OUTPUT UP TO 45kW 

Satisfactory provision of chimneys and 

Flues for oilfired appliances:  

flue gas temperature

fluepipes depends upon the flue gas temperature 

to be expected in normal service and separate 

guidance is given in this Approved Document 

according to whether the proposed installation 

will have a flue gas temperature more than or less 

than 250C as measured by a suitable method 

such as those in OFTEC Standards A100 or 

A101.


Modern boilers bearing the CE mark, indicating 

compliance with the Boiler (Efficiency) 

Regulations (1993), normally have flue gas 

temperatures not exceeding 250C.


Information for 

individual appliances should be sought from the 

manufacturers installation instructions, from the 

manufacturers themselves or from OFTEC.


Where this is not available, flues should be 

constructed for an assumed flue gas temperature 

greater than 250C.


Provisions for flue gas 

temperatures not exceeding 250C

4.12  Satisfactory provision of chimneys and 

fluepipes for oil appliances in these cases may 

be achieved by:

a.  following the guidance on the selection of 

components and the manner of their 

installation as given in Paragraphs 4.13 to 

4.20 and the references to Section 1 or  

(if the intended appliance is new and of 

known type);

b.  i)  using factorymade components that 

achieve a performance at least equal to 

that corresponding to the designation 

given in Table 8 (for the intended appliance 

type) when tested to an appropriate 

European chimney standard (BS EN); and

installing these components in accordance 

with the guidance in Paragraphs 4.13 to 

4.20 and Section 1, as relevant, and in 

accordance with the appliance manufacturers 

and component manufacturers 

installation instructions.


Table 8   Minimum performance 

designations for chimney and 

fluepipe components for use with 

new oilfired appliances with flue 

gas temperature less than 250C

Appliance type

Minimum 

designation

Fuel type

Condensing boiler, 

including combination 

boiler, range cooker, 

range cooker/boiler  

with pressurejet burners

Condensing boiler, 

including combination 

boiler, range cooker, 

range cooker/boiler  

with pressurejet burners

Noncondensing boiler, 

including combination 

boiler, range cooker, 

range cooker/boiler  

with pressurejet burners

Noncondensing boiler, 

including combination 

boiler, range cooker, 

range cooker/boiler  

with pressurejet burners

T120 N2 W1 O

Class C2 oil 

(kerosene) 

Liquid biofuel 

conforming to 

EN 14213:2003

T160 N2 W2 O

Class D oil 

(heating oil)

T250 N2 D1 O

Class C2 oil 

(kerosene) 

Liquid biofuel 

conforming to 

EN 14213:2003

T250 N2 D2 O

Class D oil 

(heating oil)

Cooker and room heater 

 with vaporising burner

T160 N2 D1 O

Cooker and room heater 

 with vaporising burner

T250 N2 D2 O

Class C2 oil 

(kerosene)

Class D oil 

(heating oil)

Notes:

1.


Where the appliance 

manufacturers installation instructions specify a higher 

designation, this should be complied with.


They can 

also be constructed from factorymade flueblock 

systems comprising straight blocks, recess units, 

lintel blocks, offset blocks, transfer blocks and 

jointing materials complying with:

a.  BS EN 1858:2003 for concrete flueblocks; or

b.  BS EN 1806:2006 for clay/ceramic flueblocks, 

with a performance at least equal to the 

designation given in Table 8 for the intended 

appliance type.


4.16  Flueblock chimneys should be installed 

with sealed joints in accordance with the 

flueblock manufacturers installation instructions.


Where bends or offsets are required, these 

should be formed using matching factorymade 

components.


Location and shielding of flues

4.18  A way of protecting the building fabric 

from the heat dissipation from flues, where flue 

gas temperatures are not expected to exceed 

250C, would be to follow the guidance in Table 9.


4.19  Where a fluepipe or chimney penetrates a 

fire compartment wall or floor, it must not breach 

the fire separation requirements of Part B.


4.20  Fluepipes and factorymade chimneys 

should also be guarded if they could be at risk of 

damage or if they present a hazard to people that 

is not immediately apparent such as when they 

traverse intermediate floors out of sight of the 

appliance.


Table 9   Protecting buildings from hot 

flues for flue gas temperatures 

not more than 250C

Flue within:

Protection measures

Connecting fluepipe

Factorymade 

chimney designated in 

accordance with BS EN 

18561:2003

Flues should be at least 25mm 

from any combustible material 

(measured from the outer surface 

of the flue wall, or the outer 

surface of the inner wall in the 

case of multiwalled products).


(The 

airspace could be wholly or 

partially filled with non

combustible insulating material.)


Masonry chimney

Provide at least 25mm of 

masonry between flues and 

any combustible material.


Flueblock chimney

Provide flueblock walls at least 

25mm thick.


Flue assemblies 

for roomsealed 

appliances 

a)   flues passing through 

combustible walls should 

be surrounded by insulating 

material at least 50mm thick.


b)   provide a clearance of at least 

50mm from the edge of the flue 

outlet to any combustible wall 

cladding.


Relining of flues in chimneys

4.21  Lining or relining flues may be building 

work and, in any case, such work should be 

carried out so that the objectives of requirements 

J2 to J5 are met (see Paragraphs 1.34 and 1.35).


For flue liners serving oil appliances, ways of 

meeting the requirements include the use of:

a.  linings suitable for use if the flue gas 

temperature can be expected to exceed 

250C such as:

liners as described in Paragraph 1.27;

liners as described in Paragraph 2.20;

iii.


The perimeter 

of this safe region should be marked to provide 

a warning to the building occupants and to 

discourage combustible floor finishes such as 

carpet from being laid too close to the appliance.


Special measures may be unnecessary 

if the materials will not be subjected to 

temperatures in excess of 100C, but otherwise 

a way of meeting the requirement would be to 

protect combustible fabric with:

a.  a shield of noncombustible material, such as 

insulating board with fireresistant surface; or

b.  an airspace of at least 75mm (see Diagram 

39 in Section 3).


4.29  Appliances having surface temperatures 

during normal operation of no more than 100C 

would not normally require shielding.


b.  linings suitable for use if the flue gas 

temperature is unlikely to exceed 250C  

such as:

i.  any of the linings described in (a) above;

ii.


(if the appliance is new and of known 

type) flue lining systems that have a 

performance at least equal to that 

corresponding to the designation given in 

Table 8 for the intended appliance type.


4.22  Flexible metal flue liners should be 

installed in one complete length without joints 

within the chimney.


Other than for sealing at the 

top and the bottom, the space between the 

chimney and the liner should be left empty unless 

this is contrary to the manufacturers instructions.


Doubleskin flexible flue liners should be installed 

in accordance with the manufacturers installation 

instructions.


Liners should be installed in 

accordance with BS EN 158271:2007.


Flues for appliances burning  

Class D oil

4.23  Flues which may be expected to serve 

appliances burning Class D oil should be made 

of materials which are resistant to acids of 

sulphur, i.e.


4.25 

If the operation of an appliance is unlikely 

to cause the temperature of the floor below it to 

exceed 100C, as shown using an appropriate 

test procedure such as those in OFTEC Standards 

A 100 and A 101, special measures may be 

unnecessary beyond the provision of a rigid, 

imperforate, and nonabsorbent sheet of non

combustible material such as a steel tray.


If the appliance could cause the temperature 

4.26 

of the floor below it to exceed 100C, a more 

substantial hearth is required.


A way of meeting 

the requirement would be to provide a hearth of 

solid noncombustible material at least 125mm 

thick (which may include the thickness of any 

noncombustible floor) with plan dimensions not 

less than those shown in Diagram 24 in Section 

2.


It should have no combustible material below 

it unless there is an airspace of at least 50mm 

between the material and the underside of the 

hearth, or there is a distance of at least 250mm 

 JApproved Document J Combustion appliances and fuel storage systemsADDITIONAL PROVISIONS FOR OIL BURNING APPLIANCES 

WITH A RATED OUTPUT UP TO 45kW

Diagram 42   Location of an oilfired appliance in relation to its hearth.


Carbon monoxide alarms

4.30  Where a new or replacement fixed oil 

burning appliance is installed in a dwelling, a 

carbon monoxide alarm should be provided in 

the room where the appliance is located.


4.32  The carbon monoxide alarm should be 

located in the same room as the appliance:

a.   on the ceiling at least 300mm from any wall 

or, if it is located on a wall, as high up as 

possible (above any doors and windows) but 

not within 150mm of the ceiling; and

J Combustion appliances and fuel storage systems Approved Document J 

Section 5: Provisions for liquid fuel storage 

and supply

Performance

In the Secretary of States view 

requirements J6 and J7 will be met if:

a.  oil and LPG fuel storage installations 

including the pipework connecting them to 

the combustion appliances in the buildings 

they serve are located and constructed so 

that they are reasonably protected from fires 

which may occur in buildings or beyond 

boundaries;

b.  oil storage tanks, their ancillary equipment 

and the pipework connecting them to 

combustion appliances in buildings used 

wholly or mainly for private dwellings:

i.  are reasonably resistant to physical 

damage and corrosion and are designed 

and installed so as to minimise the risk 

of oil escaping during the filling or 

maintenance of the tank; and

incorporate secondary containment when 

there is a significant risk of pollution; and

iii.


5.3  Requirement J7 does not apply to oil 

storage systems where the capacity of the tank 

exceeds 3500 litres, or where the tank is fully 

buried or where the building served is not wholly 

or mainly used as one or more private dwellings.


However, requirement J6 applies to oil storage 

systems serving buildings of all descriptions, 

where the capacity of the tank exceeds 90 litres, 

with no upper capacity limit on application, and 

including cases where the tank is buried.


This can be 

achieved with a hard surface beneath the tank 

such as concrete, or paving slabs at least 42mm 

thick, extending out at least 300mm beyond the 

perimeter of the tank (or its external skin if it is of 

the integrally bunded type).


Table 10   Fire protection for oil 

storage tanks

Location of tank

Protection usually satisfactory

Locate tanks in a place of special fire 

hazard which should be directly 

ventilated to outside.


a)   Make building walls imperforate (1) 

within 1800mm of tanks with at least 

30 minutes fire resistance (2) to 

internal fire and construct eaves 

within 1800mm of tanks and 

extending 300mm beyond each side 

of tanks with at least 30 minutes fire 

resistance to external fire and with 

noncombustible cladding; or 

b)   Provide a fire wall (3) between the 

tank and any part of the building 

within 1800mm of the tank and 

construct eaves as in (a) above.


The fire wall should extend at least 

300mm higher and wider than the 

affected parts of the tank.


Provide a fire wall between the tank and 

the boundary or a boundary wall having 

at least 30 minutes fire resistance to fire 

on either side.


The fire wall or the 

boundary wall should extend at least 

300mm higher and wider than the top 

and sides of the tank.


Within a building

Less than 1800mm 

from any part of a 

building

Less than 760mm 

from a boundary

At least 1800mm 

from the building and 

at least 760mm from 

a boundary

Notes:

1.


JApproved Document J Combustion appliances and fuel storage systems 

PROVISIONS FOR LIQUID FUEL STORAGE AND SUPPLY

Fire walls should be built to be stable so 

as not to pose a danger to people around them.


Oil supply pipe systems:  

means of automatic isolation

A way of meeting the requirement would 

be to install fuel pipework which is resistant to 

the effects of fire and to fit a proprietary fire 

valve system in accordance with the relevant 

recommendations in BS 54101:1997, Sections 

8.2 and 8.3.


In such cases, secondary 

containment should be provided where there is a 

significant risk of oil pollution.


For the purposes 

of requirement J6, there is a significant risk of 

pollution if the oil storage installation:

a.  has a total capacity of more than 2500 litres; or

b.  is located within 10m of inland freshwaters 

or coastal waters; or

c.  is located where spillage could run into an 

open drain or to a loosefitting manhole  

cover; or

d.  is located within 50m of sources of potable 

water, such as wells, boreholes or springs; or

e.  is located where oil spilled from the 

installation could reach the waters listed 

above by running across hard ground; or

is located where tank vent pipe outlets 

cannot be seen from the intended filling point.


However:

c.  where the bund walls are part of the walls of a 

chamber or building enclosing the tank, any 

door through such walls should be above 

bund level; and

d.  specialist advice should be sought where 

the bund has a structural role as part of a 

building.


5.11  Bunds, whether part of prefabricated tank 

systems or constructed on site, should have a 

capacity of at least 110 per cent of the largest 

tank they contain.


A storage installation 

may be shown to comply with the legislation by 

constructing it in accordance with an appropriate 

industry Code of Practice, prepared in 

Combustion appliances and fuel storage systems Approved Document JPROVISIONS FOR LIQUID FUEL STORAGE AND SUPPLY 

5.18  A fire wall should be at least as high as the 

pressure relief valve.


Satisfactory building 

work provisions would be to provide a firm level 

base such as concrete at least 50mm thick or 

paving slabs bedded on mortar at a location so 

that cylinder valves will be:

a.  at least 1m horizontally and 300mm vertically 

from openings in the building or heat sources 

such as flue terminals and tumbledryer 

vents; and

b.  at least 2m horizontally from drains without 

traps, unsealed gullies or cellar hatches 

unless an intervening wall not less than 

250mm high is provided.


Tank location and protective 

measures

5.14  For LPG storage systems of up to 1.1 

tonne capacity, comprising one tank standing in 

the open air, a way of meeting the requirement 

J6 would be to comply with the relevant 

recommendations in the UKLPG Code Of 

Practice 1: Bulk LPG Storage at Fixed 

Installations Part 1 (2009) and BS 54821:2005 

(see Appendix F and Other Publications referred 

to) whilst also adopting the following guidance:

5.15  The LPG tank should be installed outdoors 

and not within an open pit.


The tank should be 

adequately separated from buildings, the 

boundary and any fixed sources of ignition to 

enable safe dispersal in the event of venting or 

leaks and in the event of fire to reduce the risk of 

fire spreading.


Drains, 

gullies and cellar hatches within the separation 

distances should be protected from gas entry.


Where a fire wall is part of the 

building or a boundary wall, it should be located 

in accordance with Diagram 43(c) and, if part of 

the building, constructed in accordance with 

Diagram 43(d).


They should have a fire resistance 

(insulation, integrity and stability (REI)) of at least 

30 minutes but, if part of the building as shown in 

Diagram 43 (d), they should have a fire resistance 

(REI) of at least 60 minutes.


To ensure good 

ventilation, fire walls should not normally be built 

on more than one side of a tank.


Table 11  Fire protection for LPG storage tanks (see Diagram 43)

Capacity of tank not exceeding (tonnes):

Minimum separation distances from buildings, 

boundaries or fixed sources of ignition (metres)

To a tank with no fire wall or 

to a tank around a fire wall

To a tank shielded by 

a fire wall

Approved Document J Combustion appliances and fuel storage systemsJ 

PROVISIONS FOR LIQUID FUEL STORAGE AND SUPPLY

Diagram 43   Separation or shielding of liquefied petroleum gas tanks of up to 1.1 

tonne capacity from buildings, boundaries and fixed sources of ignition

Table 11

Column (B)

Table 11

Column (C)

Table 11

Column (C)

Table 11

Column (B)

Table 11

Column (C)

Table 11 Column (B)

(See Diagram (c) above)

Combustion appliances and fuel storage systems Approved Document JPROVISIONS FOR LIQUID FUEL STORAGE AND SUPPLY 

Diagram 44   Location of LPG cylinders

5.22 

In respect of installation pipework subject 

to the provisions of the GSIUR, Regulation 19(6) 

of the GSIUR requires that installation pipework 

should not be installed in any shaft, duct or void 

which is not adequately ventilated.


LPG pipework (Informative)

5.21  For the puposes of the Gas Safety 

(Installation and Use) Regulations 1998 (GSIUR), 

where the LPG service pipework runs underground 

from the LPG tank to the premises it should be 

manufactured of noncorroding material.


Pipe 

entering the building should be manufactured 

from metallic material and the transition joints 

between the nonmetallic and metallic pipe 

should be located outdoors.


The sleeve should be continuous through the 

external wall and be sealed at the inner wall to 

ensure that any escapes of gas are vented to the 

outside only.


If you are a sub

contractor, a copy should be offered to the main contractor.


If 

you are a subcontractor, a copy should be offered to the main contractor.


JApproved Document J Combustion appliances and fuel storage systems 

Appendix B: Opening areas of large or 

unusual fireplaces 

(SEE PARAGRAPH 2.7)

calculated from the following formula:

The opening area of a fireplace should be 

Examples of L and H for large and unusual 

fireplace openings are shown in Diagram 45.


6kW more than the rating at which permanent 

ventilation openings become necessary for the 

adjoining room.


In addition, appliance performance 

tests, including flue spillage tests to check for 

compliance with J2, should be carried out when 

an appliance is commissioned to check for 

compliance with Part L and as required by the 

Gas Safety (Installation and Use) Regulations.


Tests on flues should be carried out at the 

most appropriate time during the building work.


Where possible, for example, smoke tests should 

be performed when the structure of a chimney is 

visible and before the application of finishes such 

as plaster or dry lining that could obscure sight of 

smoke leakage during testing.


Tar 

deposits caused by burning wood may be 

especially hard to dislodge and should be 

removed.


The debris that comes down the 

chimney when sweeping should be examined 

for excessive quantities of lining or brick that 

are signs that further repairs are necessary.


Deterioration in the structure, connections 

or linings which could affect the flues 

gastightness and safe performance with 

the proposed combustion appliance.


Following 

inspection, the chimney should be subjected to a 

smoke test.


Appliances

E8  Where a combustion appliance is provided 

and connected up to the flue system as part of 

the work, the complete system of appliance and 

flue should be tested for gastightness in addition 

to testing the flue separately as above.


It should be 

carried out before smoke testing.


E10  A heavy ball, with a diameter about 25mm 

less than that of the flue, is lowered on a rope 

from the flue outlet to the bottom of the flue.


Other smoke testing procedures could be used 

where these form part of the procedure for the 

installation of an approved flue or relining system

Smoke test I

E13  All doors and windows in the room served 

by the flue should be closed.


When 

smoke starts to form, the base of the flue or 

fireplace opening should be sealed or the 

appliance should be closed, so that the smoke 

can only enter the flue.


(For example, the recess 

opening should be closed off with a board or 

plate, sealed at the edges or, if the pellets are in 

the appliance, its doors, ashpit covers and vents 

should be closed.)


E14  Smoke should be seen to issue freely 

from the flue outlet or terminal.


The test should be 

allowed to continue for at least 5 minutes.


Smoke test II

E15  All doors and windows in the room served 

by the flue should be closed.


E16  Smoke should be seen to issue freely from 

the flue outlet or terminal and not to spill back 

into the room.


There should be no significant 

leakage of smoke from the length of the chimney 

inside or outside of the building.


Notes in relation to testing

E18  Where warming of the flue is specified, this 

is intended to establish a draught, but this may 

take more than 10 minutes in the case of large or 

cold flues.


When checking for smoke 

leakage from a flue, it should be borne in mind 

that smoke from a faulty flue can emerge some 

distance away from the original fault.


In such 

cases, the smoke could emerge from such places 

as barge overhangs in the end of terrace 

dwellings or from window reveals in cavity walls.


It should be noted that smoke pellets 

create a pressure significantly higher than the 

pressure required in the product standards for 

natural draught chimneys and for flues having a 

gastightness designation of N1.


If forceful plumes, or large volumes of 

smoke are seen, this could indicate a major fault 

such as an incorrectly made connection or joint, 

or a damaged section of chimney that requires 

investigation and remedial action followed by a 

repeat of the test.


Approved Document J Combustion appliances and fuel storage systemsAppendix F: Assessing air permeability of 

older dwellings in relation to permanent 

ventilation requirements

Failure to implement even a few of these 

measures will typically mean that the overall air 

permeability will probably exceed 5.0 m3/(h.m2) at 

50 Pa.


If in doubt then assume 

that the air permeability is lower than 5.0 m3/

(h.m2) at 50 Pa and fit the appropriate permanent 

ventilation or seek specialist advice.


Older houses are unlikely to have been 

tested but are unlikely to achieve an air 

permeability of less than 5.0 m3/(h.m2) at 50 Pa 

unless the building fabric has been substantially 

upgraded.


for clay flue 

liners a designation Liner  EN 1457300A1N2 

means it is suitable for a chimney with the 

designation T600 N2 D 3 G, with a nominal 

size of 300mm.


In selecting an appliance for a given 

chimney designation, the appliance, irrespective 

of the fuel used, is required to generate 

combustion products with characteristics equal 

or less than those designated for the chimney.


When selecting a chimney suitable for a given 

appliance, any chimney with performance 

characteristics equal to or higher than those 

appropriate for the appliance may be used.


Temperature classes

Temperature classes are set out in Table 

G1 and expressed as T followed by a number 

which is less than or equal to the nominal 

working temperature, i.e., the average flue  

gas temperature obtained during the nominal/

rated output test (usually the maximum  

operating level);

Table G1  Temperature classes

Temperature class

Nominal working 

temperature C

T 080

T 100

T 120

T 140

T 160

T 200

T 250

T 300

T 400

T 450

T 600

 100

 120 

 140

 160

 200

 250

 300

 400

 450

 600

Pressure classes

Pressure classes are set out in Table G2 

and expressed as either N, P or H followed 

by either 1 or 2.


BS 715:2005  

Specification for metal flue pipes, fittings, terminals 

and accessories for gasfired appliances with a 

rated input not exceeding 60kW.


BS 54401:2008  

Installation and maintenance of flues and 

ventilation for gas appliances of rated input not 

exceeding 70kW net (1st, 2nd and 3rd family 

gases).


BS 54402:2000  

Installation and maintenance of flues and 

ventilation for gas appliances of rated input not 

exceeding 70kW net (1st, 2nd and 3rd Family 

Gases).


Installations at 

permanent dwellings, residential park homes and 

commercial premises, with installation pipework 

sizes not exceeding DN 25 for steel and DN 28 

for corrugated stainless steel or copper.


BS 5546:2000  

Specification for installation of hot water 

supplies for domestic purposes, using gas fired 

appliances of rated input not exceeding 70kW.


